GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE; 

OR THE 

COURT OF HENRY THE THIRD 
KEEPING FESTIVAL IN ARDEN. 



 



GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE 



INTRODUCTION. 

" Well ! now are we in Arden," said 
an English traveller to his companion, as 
they passed between Coventry and Warwick, over ground, which his dear Shakspeare had made classic. As he uttered 
this exclamation of Rosalind, he looked forward with somewhat of the surprise and 
curiosity, which she may be supposed to 
have felt, and with an enthusiasm all his 
own, on beholding the very scene, into 
which the imagination of the poet had so 
often transported him with a faint degree 




 

of its own rapture. He was not, it appears, 
one of those critics, who think that the 
Arden of Shakspeare, lay in France. But 
he looked in vain for the thick and gloomy 
woods, which, in a former age, were the 
home of the doubtful fugitive, and so much 
the terror of the traveller, that it had been 
found necessary, on this very road, to clear 
the ground, for a breadth of six acres on 
each side, in order to protect the wayfaring part of his Majesty's liege subjects. 
Now, albeit the landscape was still wild 
and woody, he could not any where espy 
a forest scene of dignity sufficient to call 
up before his fancy the exiled duke and 
his court, at their hunter-feast, beneath 
the twilight of the boughs ; nor a single 
beech, under the grandeur of whose shade 
the melancholy Jaques, might "lose and neglect the creeping hours of time," while he 
sadly sympathized with the poor stag, that, 
escaped from the pursuit of man, came to 



 

drop his tears into the running brook, and 
to die in quiet. Not even a grove appeared, through whose deep vista the traveller 
might fancy that he caught, in the gayer 
light, a glimpse of the wandering Rosalind 
and her companions, the wearied princess 
and the motley fool, or of the figure of 
Orlando, leaning against an oak, and listening to her song : he could not even catch 
the last faint echo of that song, in a scene 
so different from the one his fancy had represented to him for the forest of Arden. 

" Alas!'  said he, " that enchanting vision is no more found, except in the very 
heart of a populous city, and then neither 
by the glimmering of the dawn, nor by the 
glow of evening, but by the paltry light of 
stage-lamps. Yet there, surrounded by a 
noisy multitude, whose cat-calls often piped 
instead of the black-bird, I have found 
myself transported into the wildest region 
of poetry and solitude ; while here, on the 




very spot which Shakspeare drew, I am 
suddenly let down from the full glow of 
my holiday-feelings into the plain reality 
of this work-a-day world." 

Here ensued a conversation on illusions 
of the imagination and on the various 
powers of exciting them, shown by English 
poets, especially by Shakspeare and Milton, which it is unnecessary to repeat in 
this place. Such was its length, that Mr. 
Simpson's part in it had gradually become 
less and less active, while Wilioughton's 
increased earnestness had rendered him less 
and less Sensible of the deficiency of replies. 
At last, on his asking, rather peremptorily, 
whether his friend did not recollect some 
fine effects of the towers of Windsor Castle 
upon the imagination, Mr. Simpson, fortunately concealing how nearly he had approached to a nap, answered, " No, no ; I 
do not recollect any thing of what you tell 
me ; but you were talking a little while 



 

ago of Hamlet and towers ; now, if you 
want towers that would do honour to 
Hamlet, go to Warwick Castle, and if we 
reach it, as we hope, this night, you can 
walk from the inn while supper is preparing, and you will find, on the terrace or 
platform before the gates, towers frowning and majestic enough. If the moon is 
up, you will see them to perfection, and, as 
you are so fond of ghosts, you can hardly 
fail to make an assignation with one there." 
" I shall delight in the advantage," replied Willoughton, laughing : " Though I 
am not so fond of ghosts in general, as you 
seem to think. It is only for a few of particular excellence, that I feel a friendship ; 
for them, indeed, I am willing to own even 
an affection 

Willoughton, not receiving a rejoinder, 
observed, that his friend had fallen again 
into his nap ; and he returned to the busy 
thoughts, to which his first view of this 



 

land of Arden, the ground of Shakspeare, 
had led. Sunk in reverie, he was no longer 
in the living scene, hut ranging over worlds 
of his own, till a jolt of the carriage awoke 
his companion ; who, shaking his head, and 
looking out of the window, with the sudden 
alertness of one who thinks he has been 
losing time, now supposed himself bound 
to brush up his thoughts and to talk to his 
friend. 

Willoughton could well have spared the 
interruption, till a remark, delivered with 
an air of self-satisfaction, touched the string 
that recalled him willingly to the present 
scene. 

" There now is an oak," said Simpson, 
" that may have been of Elizabeth's time, 
by the hollowness of its vast trunk and the 
state of its branches." 

" Ay, long before her time," said his 
companion, " and perhaps Shakspeare's eyes 
have dwelt on it ; perhaps he has rested 



 

under its shade : — O ! we are coming now 
to something like the Forest of Arden : see 
how finely the woods rise in the distance, 
and what a rich gleam the west era sun 
throws along the ground, beyond those 
low-hung boughs on our left.' 

As the travellers advanced upon Kenilworth-chace, the country assumed a mere 
forest-like appearance, and a new train of 
ideas engaged Willoughton, on approaching the venerable ruins of the once magnificent castle, at one period its prison, and at 
another, the plaisance of royalty, where 
Edward the II. groaned under the traiterous power of Mortimer, and his abandoned 
Queen ; and where the crafty Leicester 
entertained Elizabeth, with princely splendour. The domain of this castle, with 
its parks and chaces, included a circuit of 
nearly twenty miles ; and when a survey 
of it was taken in the reign of James the 
I., on its forfeiture by the voluntary exile 




 

and contempt of Sir Robert Dudley, the 
son of Leicester and of his first wife, the 
Lady Sheffield, — the woods alone were 
valued at twenty thousand pounds, according to Dugdale, who observes of the castle 
and its territory, that "the like, both for 
strength, state, and pleasure, was not within the realm of England." 

Recollections of the long and varied history of this castle, crowded upon the mind 
of Willoughton, and he looked out, with 
impatience, for a glimpse of its stately 
towers in the distance, and then of its 
mouldering gateways, in the sun gleam, beneath the woods that now rose round him 
with majestic shade. Here, at least, was 
a mass and pomp of foliage worthy of the 
noble ruin he was approaching and of 
the memory of Arden ; and, when he first 
caught a view of the grey walls and turrets 
overtopping the woods, lighted up by the 
evening sun, whose long beams, slanting 



 

now under the boughs, touched with a 
golden flush the bending trunk of many 
an old beech standing deep within the 
shade, he uttered a note of admiration 
and curiosity that discomposed Mr. Simpson, who immediately directed the postilion to make his way to the nearest gate. 

Soon afterwards they found themselves 
in a valley, whose woody slopes excluded 
all distant prospect, and confined their 
attention to the venerable relique, which 
seemed to characterise, with its own quiet 
gloom, the surrounding landscape. They 
observed the several fine and detached 
masses of the castle rising on a lone rock 
in the centre of this secluded little valley ; 
and, as they drove towards the only entrance of the area of these deserted courts, 
near the square-turreted gateway, which 
Leicester built for the grand approach 
to the castle, the impatience of Willonghton became tempered with a gentle and 



 

luxurious melancholy, and he forgot even 
Shakspeare, while he was influenced by 
somewhat of the poet's feelings. 

But a sense of real life broke in upon 
him even in this scene of solemn grandeur, 
and it required somewhat of the patience 
of a philosopher to endure, in the full glow 
of his present enthusiasm, the clamorous 
impetuosity of idle children, who, on the 
first sound of wheels, were seen running 
to assail the strangers from every cottage 
on the neighbouring banks. The visions 
of quiet solitude and of venerable antiquity 
were, in an instant, dispersed ; the chaise 
was surrounded, and the travellers, having 
alighted, made their way with difficulty to 
the little gate, that led through a garden 
beside Leicester's ruined tower into the 
area that was once the lower court of the 
castle, followed by a noisy troop, whom 
neither money, nor command, could for 
some time disperse. 



 

The tower — the gateway being now 
closed up, — was no longer accessible to 
curiosity, nor could gratify it by any traits 
of the customs of former times. No warder's bench lurked within the gloom, nor 
portcullis hung in the arch. The warden's chamber for those, who, by military 
tenure, kept guard on certain nights of 
the year, was transformed into a light parlour, and the whole building changed into 
a modern habitation. From the green and 
broken square, anciently the lower courtyard, the travellers looked up to the noble mass of ruins that yet stand proudly 
on their rocky knoll, and form three irregular sides of what was once the inner 
and grand court. 

Of the fourth side, which separated the 
upper from the lower court, are now no 
vestiges, save in the inequality of the 
ground where their foundations stood, 
and where the walls, fallen from above, 



 

may lie buried under the turf and briers, 
that now cover the spot. 

On the left, the shattered walls of that 
lofty pile, built by Leicester and still called by his name, advance proudly to the 
edge of the eminence that overlooked the 
lower court, hung with the richest drapery 
of ivy ; on the right, stands the strong 
square tower, called Caesar's, which, though 
the most ancient part of the castle, appears 
fresher and less injured by time, than parts 
that were raised some ages later. This 
was the keep, or citadel, of the castle ; and 
the prodigious thickness of the walls appears through the three arches in front, 
proportioned and shaped like some which 
may yet be seen in aqueducts near Rome ; 
the walls here show a depth of fifteen or 
sixteen feet. The stone, of which this noble tower is built, is of closer texture and 
of a greyer hue, than that in any other 
part of the building; and this hue har


 

monizes beautifully with the ivy towers, 
which overshadow its arches and doorcases, and with the ashlings and elder 
crowning its summit, which highly overtops every relique of this once magnificent 
abode of princes. 

" It should seem," said Willoughton, 
" that no human force could lay low walls 
of such strength as these ; yet, as one side 
of the tower is destroyed, while the other 
three remain nearly entire, it must have 
been assailed by some power more sudden 
and partial than that of time." 

" Yes, Sir, yes," said a man, who had 
been standing by, observing the strangers 
with attentive curiosity, " that part was 
pulled down by Cromwell's soldiers, and, 
if they had had more time on their side, 
they would have pulled it all down ; as it 
was, they did a mort of mischief." 

Willoughton turned to look at his informer, and saw a tall, thin man, who ap





peared to be a villager, and who, without 
waiting for encouragement, proceeded : " I 
have heard say, they destroyed all that 
stood between Caesar's and John O'Gaunt's 
tower there, at the end of the great hall, 
and a deal on the other side of the court, 
between the Whitehall and Lord Leicester's buildings." 

" Are those walls before us the remains 
of the great hall?" inquired Mr. Simpson, 
pointing to a picturesque mass of ruins, 
standing on the third side of the upper 
court and seen in perspective between the 
other two. 

" Yes, Sir," said the man, " that there 
was the great banqueting-hall where" — 

" Leicester entertained Queen Elizabeth," observed Willoughton. " How 
beautifully the ivy falls over those light 
Gothic window-mullions and that arched 
door-way, so appropriately and elegantly 
sculptured with vine-leaves ! The sun 



GASTON BE BLONDEVILLE. 



 



now slopes its rays through the arch, as if 
purposely to show the beauty of its proportion and the grace of the vine that 
entwines it." 

" Ay," said Mr. Simpson, " many a pitcher of wine and many a baron of beef 
have been earned under that arch by the 
kings yeomen, when Henry the Third 
kept his court here." 

 I doubt whether by yeomen," replied 
Willoughton, " for, though yeomen of the 
household are mentioned, about this time, 
yeomen of the guard, a part of whose 
office it afterwards became to carry certain 
dishes to the king's table, do not occur 
till the reign of Henry the Seventh. However, it is probable, that, before the appointment of the latter, yeomen of the 
household might perform this business on 
state occasions, and in that very hall may 
have stood before the long tables, in double row, with wine ewers in their hands." 







" Those were times worth living in," 
observed Mr. Simpson. 

" Ay, those were jolly times ! Sir," said 
the stranger man ; " it 's lonely and sad 
enough in that old hall now ; nothing but 
briers and ivy. Why, there is an ivy tree 
now against that old wall there, partly as 
old as the wall itself. Look, Sir, it is as 
grey, and almost as sapless as the stone it 
crawls upon, though the trunk is such a 
size, and hardly shows a green leaf, spring 
or summer." 

The travellers made their way among 
the briers to take a nearer view of it ; 
and, if verdant festoons of younger plants 
had charmed them, Willoughton, at least, 
was no less affected by the withered sinews and grey locks of this most forlorn 
and aged tree, which had itself become a 
ruin, while adorning another. He climbed 
over hillocks of briers and weeds, which 
now covered the ruins of walls, fallen into 



 

this court-yard, and he looked down into 
the area of the great hall, through a doorway which had once led from it by a 
vestibule towards the white-hall, of which 
latter hardly a vestige remains, and to 
King Henry's lodgings. Here he distinguished the upper end of that magnificent 
banqueting-room, the very spot where the 
dels, or high table, had stood, which had 
feasted kings and princes, its lords, or visitors ; where Henry the Third had sitten, where John O' Gaunt had caroused, 
and where Elizabeth had received the 
homage of Leicester. 

At one end of this platform were still 
the remains of the large bay-window, opening upon the grand-court, where the cupboard had stood, and the golden plate 
was piled ; at the other end, a windowed 
recess bowed out towards the spot, where 
there had been a lake, and to woods, that 
still flourished. This also, on state occa


 






sions, had probably held a plate-board, or 
cup-board, and, on others, had been occupied as a pleasant seat, commanding the 
finest views of the park. 

The four walls only of this noble hall 
marked its former grandeur, not a fragment of either roof, or floor, remaining ; 
the ground, upon which Willoughton immediately looked, having been the foundation of a chamber, or hall, for domestic 
and inferior guests, under the great one, 
which was eighty-six feet in length, and 
forty-five in width. 

Those walls, where gorgeous tapestry 
had hung, showed only the remains of 
door-ways and of beautiful gothic windows, that had admitted the light of the 
same sun, which at this moment sent the 
last gleam of another day upon Willoughton, and warned him, that another portion 
of his life too was departing. 





The melancholy scene around him spoke, 
with the simplicity of truth, the brevity 
and nothingness of this life. Those walls 
seemed to say — " Generations have beheld 
us and passed away, as you now behold us, 
and shall pass away. They have thought 
of the generations before their time, as 
you now think of them, and as future ones 
shall think of you. The voices, that revelled beneath us, the pomp of power, the 
magnificence of wealth, the grace of beauty, 
the joy of hope, the interests of high passion and of low pursuits have passed from 
this scene for ever ; yet we remain, the 
spectres of departed years and shall remain, feeble as we are, when you, who now 
gaze upon us, shall have ceased to be in 
this world !" 

" Why, here is a stone bench yet in this 
old window," said Mr. Simpson ; " and a 
pleasant window it is still. This homely 





bench has outlived all the trappings of the 
castle, though, I dare say, it was little valued in their time ! " 

" You see, Sir,' said the old man, " it 
belongs to the wall itself; else it would 
have been carried off long ago." 

Willoughton turned at the now repeated 
voice of this stranger, whose intrusion he 
did not entirely like, though his knowledge 
of the castle might be useful, and his 
conduct did not appear to be ill-meant. To 
an inquiry, whether he lived in the neighbourhood, he answered, " Hard by, Sir, in 
Kenilworth. I saw you was a stranger, 
Sir, and thought you might like to know a 
little about the castle here ; and, unless 
you hap to light on such a one as me, you 
may go away as wise as you came — for, 
you will know nothing. No offence, I 
hope, Sir." 

" No, no ; no offence at all ;" replied 
Willoughton ; " and since you are so well 



 

acquainted with this spot, let me hear a 
little of what you know of it." 

" Ay, let us hear what you have to 
say," said Mr. Simpson. 

Willoughton, turning as he heard this, 
perceived his friend seated in the recess 
he had before noticed. Much remained 
of the beautiful stone-work of this baywindow, and it now showed itself upon 
the glowing west, where the sun had just 
descended, behind the dark woods of the 
valley. He advanced into it, and looking 
out upon the scenery, was interested by 
the stillness and solemnity that began to 
prevail over it. At some distance down 
the steep bank on which the castle stands, 
he could distinguish fragments of the 
walls that once surrounded it, with here 
and there some remains of a tower, or a 
banqueting-house. The ground below 
seemed marshy, but pasture of a better 
green stretched up the opposite slopes, 



 

and mingled with the woods, that, on 
every side, shut out the world ! This 
valley seemed the home of a composed 
melancholy. 

" But where," said Willoughton, " is 
the noble lake that, in Leicester's time, 
surrounded this castle, on which, as you 
may have heard, Queen Elizabeth was 
welcomed with pageants and so much 
flattery?" 

" Ay, where is it ?" echoed Mr. Simpson, 
looking at the old man with an air that 
seemed to say, " Now we have some use 
for you, and will put you to the test." 

But Willoughton, without giving him 
time to reply, proceeded : — 

" I am doomed to disappointment in 
Arden. For many miles, I could not discover any thing like a forest-shade, that 
might have sheltered a banished court, or 
favourite ; and here not a wave of the 
lake, that delighted a festive one, and 



 

which might have supplied me with a 
floating island, moving to rv the sound of 
invisible music, or to the shells of surrounding tritons and sea-nymphs. Nay, 
I cannot even catch a gleam of the torches, which, on such an occasion, might 
have thrown their light on the woods and 
towers of the castle, and have quivered 
on the waters over which they passed.' 

w No, sir," said the old man, " it would 
be a hard matter to find any thing of all 
that now. Cromwell's people would have 
knocked all that o' the head, when they 
drained off the water, if such things had 
been there then." 

" Cromwell's people again ! However it 
is as well to remember them. What had 
the venerable scenes of Kenilworth to do 
with politics, or freedom? But thus it is ; if 
even the leaders in political agitations have 
a better taste themselves than to destroy, 
for the mere sake of destruction, they let 

vol. i. c 






 



 



the envy and malice of their followers 
rage away against whatsoever is beautiful, 
or grand." 

So said Willoughton to his friend, who 
smiled, as he perceived that the indignant admirer of antiquity had allowed 
himself to speak of a military operation, 
as though it had been a popular commotion. 

" Where went the line of the lake, my 
man of Kenilworth ?" asked Simpson. 

" Why, Sir, it flowed round two sides 
of the castle, as I have heard say ; it went 
from the tilt-yard, all along the valley 
here, for half a mile, and spread out at the 
foot of these banks, — as wide as to the 
woods yonder, on the hill side." 

" What a noble sheet of water," exclaimed Willoughton, " with lawns and 
woods sloping to its margin and reflected 
on its surface !" 

" Yes, Sir ; all that on the opposite side 





was a deer-park then, as I Ve heard from 
the account of some book, except that 
low ground further on, and that was pasture for cattle." 

" For cattle!" exclaimed Mr. Simpson, 
— " how they would poach such ground as 
that !" 

" But what a beautiful picture they 
helped to make from the castle windows 
here," said Willoughton; u when, on a summer's noon, they lay under those shades, or 
stood in the cool waters of the lake." 

" Ay," said Mr. Simpson, " to such as 
did not value the land." 

" It was just opposite the Pleasant, yonder," said the aged historian. 

" The Pleasant " 

" Yes, Sir ; if you look this way, I will 
tell you where it stood : — it was a banqueting-house on the lake." 

" O! the Plaisance!" 

" It stood on the walls there, down in 
 



 

the valley, to the right of John O'Gaunt's 
tower here, and not far from the Swan 
Tower ; but it is so dusk now you can 
hardly see where I mean." 

Willoughton inquired where the Swan 
Tower stood. 

" Further off, a good way, Sir ; but 
there is nothing of it to be seen now. It 
stood at the corner of the garden -wall, 
just where the lake came up ; but there is 
nothing to be seen of that garden either 
now, Sir, though we know the place where 
it was. Queen Elizabeth used to take 
great delight in the banqueting-house, as 
I've heard." 

" It was pleasantly seated ;" observed 
Willoughton. 

" Yes, Sir ; but there was rare feasting 
and music too, I reckon. She used to be 
fond of sitting in this very window, too !" 

" How do you know all this, my friend?" 

" Why, Sir, the place is called Queen 
Elizabeth's turret, to this day, because she 



 

took such a fancy to it ; and it was pleasant enough to be sure, for it overlooked 
the widest part of the lake ; — this bench had 
velvet trappings enough then, I warrant. "' 

" I have no pleasure in remembering 
Elizabeth ;" said Willoughton, as he turned 
to look for his friend. 

" No ! — -not in remembering the wisest 
princess that ever reigned ?" said MrSimpson. 

" No : her wisdom partook too much of 
craft, and her policy of treachery ; and her 
cruelty to poor Mary is a bloody hand 
in her escutcheon, that will for ever haunt 
the memory of her." 

" You are too ardent, " observed Mr. 
Simpson ; " much may be said on her conduct on that head." 

" She inspires me only with aversion and 
horror," replied Willoughton. 

" She gives other people the horrors, 
too," said the villager. 

" How do you mean, friend ?" 



 

" There are strange stories told, Sir, if 
one could but believe them ; — there are 
old men now in the parish, who say they 
have seen her about the castle here, dressed 
in a great ruff about her neck, just as she 
is in her picture ; they knew her by that." 
Here Mr. Simpson, giving Willoughton 
a look of sly congratulation, on his having 
met with a person of taste seemingly so 
congenial with his own, burst forth into a 
laugh, or rather a shout, that made every 
echo of the ruin vocal, his friend smile, 
and the old man stare; who, somewhat 

gravely, proceeded 

" They say, too, she has been seen sitting there, in that very window, when there 
was but just light enough to see her by." 

" A ghost in a ruff and farthingale !" 
exclaimed Mr. Simpson, in exultation ; — 
" that is, surely, the very perfection of propriety in the ghost-costume ;" and again 
the roar of laughter rolled round every 
turret of the castle. 




" Why does that strike you as so absurd ?" asked Willoughton ; " this is only 
a ghost representing the familiar image of 
the person when alive. Can it be more 
ridiculous than the Scotch plaid for the 
supernatural being, whom we call a witch ? 
And yet, when you and I used to discuss 
the taste of ghost-dresses, you did not object to that appearance; but justified it, as 
one with which popular superstition was 
familiar." 

"Yes," replied Simpson; "but though the 
ruff and farthingale accompany our idea of 
Queen Elizabeth, it is of her, as a living 
character, not in that of her apparition. " 

" And yet," rejoined Willoughton ; " if 
you remain in this ruin, half an hour 
longer, till you can scarcely distinguish 
the walls, you will feel less inclined to 
laugh at Queen Elizabeth's ghost in a ruff 
and farthingale' 

Perhaps I might," said Mr. Simpson, 
if you had not let me so much into the 



 

secret of effect in these cases. Yet I question whether it would have been possible 
for Elizabeth's picture, arrayed in that ridiculous court-dress, supposing it actually 
to appear, to extort from me any thing 
but laughter." 

" They say, Sir," said the aged man, 
" that she looked solemn and stern enough 
as she sat in that window, just where you 
do now, leaning her head upon her hand, 
or something that looked like one. She 
sat quite still, for some time, and old 
Taylor sat quite still looking at her, for 
he could not move ; — but when she rose 
up and turned round, and made a motion with her hand — thus — as much as to 
say, s Go about your business ! ' he thought 
he should have dropped, and would have 
gone fast enough if he could." 

" Ay," said Mr. Simpson ; " there was 
the characteristical in manner, as well as 
in dress. This must be a true history !" 



 

" Well, friend," said Willoughton, " and 
what followed ?" 

ff Why, Sir, then she went down this 
steep place you now stand upon, into the 
hall there, where he could not have gone, 
in broad day-light, without risk of his 
neck ; she sank down, as it were, and he 
lost her awhile, it was so dark ; but presently he saw her, all on a sudden, standing in that door-way there, — and I can 
almost guess I see her there now." 

"You are a silly old man,' said Mr. 
Simpson ; and he looked immediately to 
the door. 

' You would not like," said Willoughton, smiling, " to inquire minutely into the 
difference between purposely avoiding to 
look, and purposely looking in the midst 
of this story ;" but — turning to the old 
man — " what next ?" 

" Why, Sir, she stood in the arch 
some time with a very stern look ; but I 




 

never rightly understood what became of 
her. Old Taylor said she passed away 
like a cloud ; but then afterwards he was 
not sure but he saw her again, in a minute or two, in this very window." 

" And have you never been fortunate 
enough' said Mr. Simpson, u to see any 
of those sights ?" 

" No, Sir, no ; I hope I have no need 
of them ; though, if I was that way 
given, I might have thought saw things 
too sometimes. Once by Mortimer's tower, 
down in the tilt-yard, I as good as thought 
I saw a man standing with a mask on his 
face, in a moonlight night, with a drawn 
sword in his hand." 

" That tower," remarked Willoughton, 
" was doubtless named after Mortimer, the 
paramour of the infamous Isabel ?" 

" They say, Sir, some king was once 
shut up there." 



 

Ay, Edward the Second, for a short 
time." 

" And they will tell you a power of 
stories of what was to be seen about that 
tower, before it was pulled down, and 
after too ; but I don't believe a word of 
them. People are always conjuring up 
strange tales when they have nothing 
better to do. I have got an old book at 
home full of them, enough to make one's 
hair stand on end, if one could but make 
it all thoroughly out. I showed it to Mr. 
Timothy, the school-master, and he could 
hardly make it out neither ; but he said 
it was no matter, for it was full of nothing but nonsense. He read me some 
of it, and I could not get it out of my 
head again for a week." 

" Ay, it met with a thriving soil," 
said Mr. Simpson, " it's well you got the 
nonsense out of your head at all. But 





how happened you to buy a book in a 
language you could not read ? " 

" I did not buy it, Sir ; and, as to the 
language, I could understand that well 
enough, but I could not read the letters ; 
and Timothy himself bungled at the spelling." 

Willoughton inquired where this book 
was met with; and whether he could 
have a sight of it ?" 

" Why, Sir, it was dug out of the 
ground, where an old chapel once stood, 
belonging to the Priory hard by. 

" O ! I remember," said Willoughton ; 
" there was formerly a monastery of Black 
Canons at Kenil worth, founded by Geoffry 
de Clinton, lord chamberlain to the first 
King Henry, and the founder of this same 
castle too : but go on." 

" The place is used for a burial-ground 
still," resumed the old villager ; " and it 
happened, that as Guy, our sexton, was 



one day going to dig a grave there, lie 
lighted upon a coffin, or the chest, or 
whatever it was, that held a many things 
hesides this strange book." 

" Indeed !" said Willoughton, eagerly ; 
u let us hear a little about this." 

" We shall not get to Warwick tonight," said Mr. Simpson, gravely. 

" Why, Sir, it was one day last autumn, 
— no, I believe it was as late as November ; 
I remember it had rained hard all morning ; but whether it was October or November, I cannot be sure." 

" That, I should suppose, does not much 
signify," said Mr. Simpson. 

"Come, now," said Willoughton, " do let 
him be as circumstantial as he pleases." 

" Willingly, willingly, only remember, 
we are not to sleep at Kenil worth." 

" Well, Sir, I cannot be sure exactly of 
the time, only it had been a dismal day ; 
but the rain was over, when old Guv came 



 

running to me in as great a fright as ever 
I saw a man, and said he had found something in the ground, he could not tell what, 
but he never felt any thing so heavy in his 
life ; he could not move it, and desired I 
would go and help him to raise it ; and he 
stared, as if he was out of his wits. When 
I heard it was so heavy, I thought we 
might as well have my son to help us, for 
he was a stout lad. Guy did not much 
like this, I saw, for he was thinking he 
should find a treasure, and Guy was always 
a close one, and for getting as much as he 
could ; it was only two years before he 
got his money raised for tolling ; and there 
is not one in the parish has liked him 
since. However, I got my son to go with 
me, and we set to work, without saying a 
word to any one ; and it was so near dark 
that nobody was likely to see us in that 
lonely place." 

" Well ! but if it had been treasure, it 




would have belonged to the Lord of the 
Manor," said Mr. Simpson. 

" Yes, Sir, I know that well enough ; 
but you shall hear. We raised it out of 
the ground at last, and what should it be 
but an old oak chest. It was so large, a 
man might have lain down in it at full 
length; but what helped to make it so 
heavy was the iron bands that held it together, and three great iron locks, that 
fastened it. Now, as the place where it 
was dug up was the east end of the church, 
Guy took it into his head it contained 
church plate, that had been put there, in 
troublesome times, by the monks of the 
priory. If you had but seen him ! he 
thought his fortune was made ; he threw 
away his spade, and cut a caper as high as 
a wall. I thought myself there must be 
something worth looking at o'the inside, 
but by this time it was so dark we could 
hardly see what we were about ; so I sent 



 

my son home for the lantern, and then 
we tried with old Guy's crow to get the 
lid open. We got it off at last ; and what 
do you think, Sir, we found ? Why, nothing but old parchments ; some with seals 
dangling to them, and some old books, 
dropping to pieces with the worms, though 
the leaves were thick enough, too : at the 
bottom of the chest was a great heap of 
dust.'' 

"Did you find nothing else?" asked Mr. 
Simpson, fixing his eyes on him. 

" No, Sir, nothing else," said the old 
man, with a little hesitation ; " nothing 
else, except an old staff, with a large head ; 
and there was a little silver on that and 
on a book I have at home." 

Mr. Simpson inquired what had made 
the chest so weighty. 

" Why, Sir, it was made of solid oak, 
six inches thick, I warrant, and had a 
great deal of iron about it. I took a fancy 



 

to that book, though I could not read it, 
for I coidd not make out the letters ; but 
there is some pretty pictures on the leaves, 
and the colours are as fresh as if they were 
just painted ; and some of the great letters 
are done all over with gold as bright as 
the sun." 

" A manuscript, illuminated probably 
by some monk of the priory," said Willoughton ; " can I see it?" 

"Yes, Sir," replied the old man, "I 
have it at home ; but what made me 
wonder most was to see it look so fresh, 
after it had lain all that time in the 
ground; to be sure it was well wrapped 
up in parchment, and the trunk was 
thick enough, for that matter; but some 
of the other books dropped to pieces as 
soon as the air came to them." 

Willoughton asked what had been done 
with the parchments ; adding, to his companion, that they were probably the leiger


 

book and some other muniments of the 
Priory, hidden when the terrors of Henry 
the Eighth first prevailed in the monasteries, and afterwards pretended to be 
lost, first from some hope of their future 
utility, and then from a fear of avowing 
their concealment. 

" When Guy," resumed the old man, 
M found what sort of treasure he had gotten, he was ready to throw himself into 
the old chest, to be put under ground with 
it again ; but I said there was no need of 
that; so we took out some of the best of 
the books, but none of the others had pictures ; and Guy took the old staff, and then 
we did lay the trunk in the earth again." 

Willoughton made many inquiries concerning the parchments with the seals, and 
the seals themselves, and whether his informant could find again the spot where 
they were deposited. 



 

" Come, come,'  said Mr. Simpson ; " let 
us leave this place ; it is almost dark." 

The old man said he thought he could 
find the spot ; but that would be of no 
use ; for it had lain so deep in the ground, 
that there had been depth over it for 
graves, and it was now beneath them. 

Willoughton, shocked at this circumstance, said no more on the subject ; but 
the old man proceeded. 

" Among other things in the book, Sir, 
is a view of this old hall. I should never 
have found it out myself; for it was no 
more like what it is now than nothing : 
but Timothy Crabb, our school-master, 
knew it at once by this very window — and 
he read something about this window, too, 
— and by a door-way in the wall, yonder." 

" How does it appear in the drawing ?" 
asked Willoughton. 

" Why, Sir, — but you shall see the book, 






if you like. The hall had a high roof, 
like a church there, and a gallery ran 
all along the bottom of it, and such a 
chimney !" — 

" Ay ! like the remains of what we see 
here now, I suppose," said Mr. Simpson. 

" No, Sir, as different as can be." 

"O! perhaps," turning to Willoughton, " it was such an one as we saw at 
Penshurst ; a raised hearth, with irons to 
hold wood, in the middle of the hall." 

" No ; that style," observed Willoughton, " was of later date than chimneys 
in English halls. It came in, I apprehend, 
with the castellated mansion, of which 
style is Penshurst, the more ancient part 
of the building at least. In the hall of the 
older castle, a chimney sloped back from 
the line of the wall into the thickness of 
it, and let out the smoke through a loop 
above. Thus, the raised hearth, on which 
the wood-fire blazed, projected into the 



 

chamber, and was sometimes overhung 
by a canopy of stone-work supported by 
pillars, that gave it a resemblance to a 
gothic porch, such as adorn some of our 
finest cathedrals. "' 

" Yes, Sir, this in the book looks like 
something like a church porch without 
the sides, the top comes so far over the 
hearth. Then all down the hall are rows 
of tables, with gentle-folk and ladies sitting 
at them, and — " 

u I must see this manuscript," interrupted Willoughton; "it apppears to be 
a curious one." 

" Come," said Mr. Simpson, " it is already so dark, we can hardly see our way 
hence. There is scarce a gleam of light 
left on the horizon." 

" Xo, Sir, but the moon is rising yonder, and some gentry have a fancy to see 
this place by moon-light." 

" O ! we have seen enough of it." 



 

" I recommend you," said Willoughton, 
" to avoid looking, just at this moment, 
towards the door at the bottom of the 
hall, lest you should see the stately form 
of Elizabeth in the arch-way ; I had 
a glimpse of something like her just 
now ; nay, I am not quite sure that I 
did not see the grave physiognomy of 
Leicester, under his small black velvet cap 
and feather," 

" We shall not get to Warwick tonight, said Mr. Simpson, fretfully. " They 
talk of the patience of a painful antiquary ; think what the patience of his 
friend must be." 

" I have not the honour to deserve the 
former title," said Willoughton. 

" Between us, we approach to it ; the 
painful part of it, you will allow, belongs 
to me." 

" In the old sense of the word," said 
Willoughton, " you do not claim it ; and, 
as to the new one, your jests recompense 



 

you for your pain : I have all possible inclination to deserve the title, in its best 
sense ; at least by cherishing those inquiries, which make us intimate with the 
characters and habits of our fellow creatures in past ages, which show them to 
us in their halls, their ceremonies, their 
tournaments, their banquets, their domestic usages and even in their monastic 
retirement. These picturesque visions, in 
which the imagination so much delights, 
and every discovery, however remote, 
awaken a peculiar kind of interest and of 
sentiment no less delightful, which render antiquity, of all studies, the least liable to the epithet of dry, though dull 
and dry people so liberally bestow it. 
Antiquity is one of the favourite regions 
of poetry." 

" Nay," said Mr. Simpson, " your woods 
and your meadows are the region for that. 
Who ever thought of looking for a muse 
in an old castle ? But come, let us re


 

member, that we are on the road for 
Warwick." 

" Before we go, my friend here must 
show me his old manuscript ; and I must 
see this fine ruin by moonlight." 

" By moonlight !" exclaimed Simpson ; 
" would you really stay for so romantic a 
purpose? We have seen it already by 
sun-light, and almost by no light at all ?." 

" The moon is rising, now, Sir," said 
the old man, " and by the time the gentleman has seen the book it will be risen 
high enough to give you light on your 
journey." 

" Meanwhile, the horses will have no 
objection to a little corn," remarked Willoughton ; " nor the postilion to a little 
ale, if this good man will direct him 
where to get it.'" 

Mr. Simpson having added, that he too 
should like a little Warwickshire ale, the 
old man replied, " The ale they sell is not 



m 



 

much to brag on ; but, if you please, gentlemen, I will direct the lad where he and 
the horses may rest themselves, and, if 
you will step with me, you can taste some 
of my home-brewed, and see the book at 
the same time." 

The travellers assented, and their conductor, after having directed the postilion to a house, accompanied them to his 
cottage, where he produced the desired 
manuscript. It was written on vellum, and 
richly illuminated, and purported to be an 
account of what passed at Kenilworth, 
when Henry the Third there kept the feast 
of Saint Michael, and of some wonderful 
accident that there befel. 

" There is a title-page written almost 
in the form of a triangle," said Willoughton, " and that about as closely as if it 
were printed. The date, which forms the 
ftpex of the reversed triangle, I cannot 

 



 

wholly make out, but it is twelve hundred 
and something." 

At the heads of chapters and sometimes 
on the broad margins, there were made 
drawings of parts of Kenilworth Castle, as 
it had appeared in the time of Henry probably, with some of the scenes which had 
there passed, and sometimes with single 
portraits of the chief persons engaged in 
them. These gave vivid ideas of the customs and manners of that period, and were 
traced, with more knowledge of perspective and more attention to proportion, than 
Wilioughton expected. Among them was 
a procession of knights and ladies, led by 
numerous harpers, returning from the 
tilt-yard to the great hall, which showed a 
high sloping roof, while the windows below, at a considerable elevation from the 
ground, had round-headed arches, instead 
of pointed ones. The door-way, leading 
into it, accorded with the place where one 



 

still appears; but the arch was differently 
constructed, and the receding mouldings 
seemed to have been ornamented with 
chevron work, or zigzag, instead of the 
elegant vine now sculptured there, which 
latter he had no hesitation in assigning to 
the time of Leicester. 

Another drawing gave an inside view of 
the hall, as mentioned by the old man. The 
roof was of great height, open to the rafters, 
and with pendent beams below, formed 
into arches, ornamented with inverted 
pinnacles, nicely carved. Another drawing 
gave the inside of a chapel, of which there 
are no longer any remains at Kenilworth. 

The original style of the building appeared very ancient, but this was mixed 
with one more light and elegant, like that 
of the pointed arches of the windows ; and 
Willoughton conjectured this improvement 
to have been made by Henry the Third, 
who is known to have repaired the chapel 




 

of the castle for his own use, during his 
occasional residence there. 

There was a representation of a marriage ceremony in celebration at the altar, 
where a numerous assemblage of dignified 
persons were arranged in state. A king 
was giving the hand of the bride to a 
young man, who was decorated with many 
military insignia, but who was so far from 
receiving the gift with joy, that he appeared to be struck with consternation, while 
the lady, by her attitude, seemed to be 
fainting, 

In the margin was a portrait of a king 
robed and wearing a crown of gold, which 
seemed intended for Henry the Third, to 
whose statue in brass, in his monument in 
Westminster Abbey, it bore a considerable 
resemblance. 

At the head of another chapter was an 
inside view of a tower, where a man was 
dieting alone near a lamp, In the back. 



 

ground a face appeared at the grate. The 
same chamber was represented afterwards, 
with a man stretched upon a low pallet, but 
whether asleep, or dead, was not expressed 
by the drawing. The lamp had gone out, 
and, instead of a face at the grate, the 
moon appeared through a window beyond, 
and threw a pale light on the couch. 

Another drawing gave a view of a chapel, or hall ; Willoughton was not certain 
which : there was, however, something like 
an altar at the farthest end, near which 
stood a figure alone, the face concealed in 
a vizor, the left arm, uplifted, held a shield, 
the right a lance, but the feet were in a 
position of rest, though another figure near 
a door was departing, as if with the fear 
of being pursued, his hands outstretched, 
and his face turned back over his shoulder. 
There, too, the moon appeared through a 
window, and the light fell upon the lifted 
shield. 




While Wiiloughton was musing what 
this could mean, the old man, looking 
upon the leaf, said, " Timothy Crabb, Sir, 
maintains this is a picture of the PrioryChapel, he is sure, as it stood formerly. I 
should never have found it out myself, 
there is so little left of the chapel ; but 
Tim makes it all out fine enough." 

"Does he tell you what that figure 
means ?" 

" Not as I remember, Sir ; but the book 
tells that, I reckon." 

Wiiloughton turned over the leaves near 
the drawing ; the language, the orthography and the characters were all so ancient, that he hesitated much. What he did 
make out, however, fixed his attention so 
deeply, that his friend lost the small remains of his patience, and declared he 
would set off without him. Wiiloughton 
then told his humble host, that, if he was 
willing to part with the manuscript, he was 
disposed to give him his own price for it. 



 

u Why, Sir, I like to look at the pictures 
sometimes, and the gold is so bright it is a 
pleasure to see it ; but the book for other 
matters is not of much value to me, 
though it may be to other people, seeing 
as I can't make it out ; and, for that matter, if I could, I do not know any good it 
would do ; for, what Tim did read made 
me as foolish almost as old John, and afraid 
to go near the castle, for some time, after 
dark, though I was always counted a little 
more sensible than some. But I see no 
good in such things, not I." 

" You are a sensible fellow," said Mr. 
Simpson, " and I wish my friend here 
had a little less curiosity, and a little more 
such wit as yours. And now, Harry, do 
leave the book and come away." 

" No, I shall first console myself for the 
mortification of your compliments. What 
shall I give you for the book, my friend ?" 

" Why, Sii', I don't know, I am sure ; 
I don't know the value of such things. 



 

Tim Crabb said it might be worth its 
weight in gold for aught he knew ; but I 
leave it, Sir, to your generosity." 

" It is well you do not leave it to 
mine," said Mr. Simpson, " for I should 
make a low reckoning of it." 

The sum Willoughton offered accorded 
with his own estimation of so curious a 
relick, rather than with the expectation of 
his host, who heard it with exclamations of 
thankfulness ; while Mr. Simpson expressed not merely surprise but reprehension, 
and the vulgar proverb of " Fools and their 
money — " was nearly audible on his lips. 

" What other books did you find in 
the same place ?" asked Willoughton. 

" Ah ! bless you, Sir," replied the ancient villager, " I wish I had a score of 
them." 

" Well you may, my friend, if they 
would fetch you such a price as this ! " was 
the ready remark of Mr. Simpson. 



 

" It is his honour's own generosity, Sir, 
and I suppose he thinks the book worth 
the money, or he would not give it." 

" Come, Harry," continued Simpson, 
" here has been folly enough for once ; let 
us be gone." 

" You are sure you have no other book 
like this?" inquired Willoughton. 

" There is another or two, that do still 
hold together, I think," said the old man ; 
" They have got no pictures ; but then they 
have the same kind of letters, that cannot 
be understood." — He went for them. 

" You will tempt the man to steal the 
parish-register, and offer it to you as a 
curious relick," said Mr. Simpson ; " and 
indeed it will deserve your money letter 
than this." 

The old man returned with a small 

quarto, printed in black letter and bound 

in real boards, which had been guarded 

at the comers with brass ; the marks of 





clasps remained on it and those of a 
lozenge in the centre of each board. 

" Though this is of later date, much 
later date, than the manuscript," said 
Willoughton, " I see it is one of the earliest hooks that came from the press in 
England, It appears also by its contents, 
to have been intended to assist the purposes of the monks of that dark age.'  

" A Boke of Sprites !" exclaimed Simpson, with a shout of exultation : " a boke 
of sprites, with the signs they may be 
known by, and divers rules to keep you 
from harm : the like was never known 
before!" 

" Excellent ! excellent ! " said Willoughton ; " and here is another black-letter 
volume. Well, friend without looking 
further, what shall I give you for 
them?" 

"This is past endurance ! " said Mr 
Simpson ; " my patience is out !" 



 

M O Sir ! I will give you these into the 
bargain," said the old man, smiling; an 
offer which Willoughton would not accept, 
who paid the old man what he thought 
they were worth. Mr. Simpson, then taking his friend by the arm, desired his host 
to direct them to the chaise. 

u I must see the ruin by moonlight,'' 
said Willoughton ; " but I will not detain 
you many minutes." 

" No, no ; you will see the towers of 
Warwick by moonlight; which will be 
much finer." 

<k My good friend here," said Willoughton, " will order the chaise round to the 
gate where it set us down ; and, by the 
time it arrives, I shall have seen what I 
wish to see." 

" Be it so," said Mr. Simpson, with an 
air of resignation ; " one is sure of you 
when a journey is to be begun ; but never 
when one would end, or hasten it. I have 



 

not forgotten our midnight rambles about 
Stonehenge ! Doubtless we were the first 
human beings, who had appeared there, 
at such an hour, for many centuries ; and 
what astonished me afterwards, more than 
any thing I saw, was, that I myself should 
have been conjured there at such an unseasonable hour ; I, whose brain never hatched 
any of those ' high and unimaginable fantasies,' as your poet Gray calls them, ' which 
distract the heads of some of his readers." 

" Ay ! those shadows of the moon at 
full," said Willoughton laughing, as they 
walked towards the ruin, his friend remonstrating with him on the imprudence 
of this passion for antiquities and on his 
credulity. "And can you really hold," 
said he, " that these books were found in 
the manner related ; and that any of 
them, especially the ' Boke of Sprites,' ever 
belonged to the library of the priory ?" 



 

 It does not seem probable," replied 
Willoughton, "that the old man should 
have invented the story he has related of 
the discovery of them ; but, be that as it 
may, the books themselves announce their 
own genuine antiquity. The manuscript 
is laboriously illuminated, and it is well 
known, that such works were chiefly 
performed by the inhabitants of monasteries. The Boke of Sprites even was 
likely to have served the purposes of 
the monks. We know that the libraries 
of monasteries contained a most heterogeneous assemblage : Ovid, the Romance 
of Charlemagne, Guy of Warwick, and 
the Rimes of Robin Hood, have been 
found on the shelf with Homilies, and 
other books ; which, although they might 
be tinged with the corruptions of the Papal school, ought not to have had such 
companions. You may recollect, that War


b#  

ton, in the interesting sketches of ancient 
manners which he gives in his History of 
English Poetry, mentions this very fully ; 
and that, among others, the library of 
Peterborough contained 'Amys and Amdion,' 'Sir Tristram Merlin's Prophecies,' 
and the ' Destruction of Troy :' and books 
of this sort were not only copied, but often 
invented by the monks, sometimes for their 
amusement, sometimes for worse purposes." 

" One of the old books you have relates 
to their castle, I think," said Mr. Simpson, 
looking up at the shadowy masses ; which, 
shown thus faintly by the rising moon, 
seemed more majestic than before. 

" Yes, and I perceive," continued Willoughton, " that even you feel a curiosity 
to know what may have passed so many 
ages back, on the spot we now stand upon." 

"Why," acknowledged Simpson, " when 
one looks up at the very walls now crumbling into ruin, that were once so magnifi




cent, and that inclosed beings with passions 
as warm as our own — beings, who have so 
long since vanished from the earth, one cannot help wishing to know a little of their 
history and of the scenes they witnessed ; 
but, for your legend, I fear to trust it." 

" It speaks of the times of Henry the 
Third," said Willoughton, " those were 
lawless enough to permit many adventures ; and, if the citizens of London were 
then robbed in the streets even at noonday, what could travellers in the forest 
of Arden expect? But this Manuscript 
seems to tell of princely feasts given in 
the castle, and of adventures passing in 
the presence of the Court." 

" Ay, if one could but believe them." 
" A great part of the castle," pursued 
Willoughton, " which then existed, is now 
gone ; and much that we look at, stands 
in its place ; but that noble hall, and 
Caesar's tower and several other towers, 



 

such as those where the moonlight falls, 
beheld the very court of Henry the Third, 
ay, and Montfort, on whom he had bestowed Kenilworth, and who added ingratitude to treason, by holding the fortress against his benefactor and liege lord." 
They stood for some minutes in silence, 
looking up at the ruin and listening, as the 
breeze rushed by, to the shivering of the 
ivy, that overhung it, — all the shining leaves 
trembling in the moonlight. The pauses 
of solemn stillness, that followed these 
sighings of the air among the old branches, 
were very solemn, and the sound itself — 
so still, uncertain, and sudden, Willoughton 
could have fancied to have been the warning murmurs of one, who, in his mortal 
state, had lived within these walls, and now 
haunted the scene where it had once revelled, or, perhaps, suffered. It seemed like 
a voice imperfectly uttering forth some dark 
prophecy, and telling of the illusion of life 



 

and the certainty of death. To Willoughton's recollection this spectacle of the remains of ages past, now glimmering under 
the soft shadows of moonlight, brought 
those touching lines of Beattie — 

" Hail, awful scenes, that calm the troubled breast, 
And woo the weary to profound repose, 
Can passion's wildest uproar lull to rest, 
And whisper comfort to the man of woes." 

Willoughton stood so wrapt, that he 
heard not his friend's inquiry, whether he 
meant to pass a night at Kenilworth, as 
a sequel to a former one at Stonehenge ; 
nor was he immediately aware of the 
nearer approach of his aged conductor, 
who said, in a tone somewhat tremulous, 
" You are now on the very spot, Sir, where 
Mortimer's tower stood ; it was the main 
entrance to the castle, when there was a 
lake, and it opened from the tilt-yard, that 
ran along the end of the water into the 
lower court : you see, Sir, it was quite on 



 

the opposite side of the castle from Lord 
Leicester's great gate." 

Willoughton surveyed the place, but not 
a vestige of the building remained. " Here 
then," said he, " the unhappy Edward the 
Second was, for a while, imprisoned, before 
he was removed to Corfe and Berkeley 
Castles, his last abodes." 

" If you please, Sir,'' said the man, " the 
chaise is at the gate ; and, if you will take 
my advice, you will not stay here long, for 
I cannot say I like it myself ; I shall begin 
to think I see that strange figure again, 
and I had rather not." 

" Well, let us go," said Mr. Simpson, 
" or I shall begin to fancy something of 
the same sort, too. What did you say, it 
had a mask on its face ?" 

" Yes, Sir, and a drawn sword in its 
hand ; but I don't like the place, Sir, let 
us go." 



? 

 Ay, ay," said Mr. Simpson, " let us go ; 
we — we — we shall not get to Warwick 

to-night." 

A laugh from his friend, which he too 
well understood, both vexed and ashamed 
him. " I did not think it possible," said 
he, " that I could have yielded to the 
contagion of this folly thus ; remember, 
however, it is not Elizabeth in her ruff 
and farthingale, that I fear, nor any thing 
else distinctly." 

Willoughton laughed again triumphantly. " Better and better ; your feelings are 
true to my arguments, in spite of your 
own. I desire no farther proof of the effects of time and circumstances — of solitude and obscurity on the imagination." 

As they passed by Caesar's tower, and 
inquired where the line of the castle-ditch 
had been traced, he observed, that probably the chief entrance had at first been 



 

over a draw-bridge to that tower, though 
now no sign of it could be distinguished. 

When the travellers were once more seated in the chaise, Mr. Simpson betook himself to sleep ; while, on their journey of four 
miles through the checkered moonlight 
of woody lanes to Warwick, Willoughton 
did not lament the silence of his friend, 
which left him to the quiet musings of his 
own mind, and to the peace of nature, reposing under this soft and beautiful shade. 
The air was so still that scarcely a leaf 
trembled of the lofty boughs that overshadowed the road ; and when the postilion 
stopped to make some alteration of the 
harness, the breathing of the horses alone 
was heard through all this scene of night. 

There is a peace of the spirits, which has 
surely somewhat holy in it. Such is the 
calmness which the view of a midsummerdawn communicates, or that of moonlight 



 

on woods and green plains ; and such Willoughton experienced during this short 
ride, till he drew near Warwick, w T hen the 
beautiful towers of Saint Mary's appeared on the right, and the more lofty and 
distant ones of the castle on the left of 
the perspective ; and these awakened the 
stronger interest of expectation. 

Having reached the inn, and Mr. Simpson, late as it was, having ordered a good 
supper, they walked out to take a view 
of the castle. Finding that, at this hour, 
they could not gain admittance by the 
porter's gate, they went to the bridge over 
the Avon, on the outside of the town, and 
thence had a fine retrospect of the castle, 
with all its towers crowning the high, 
woody bank of that peaceful and classic 
stream. One vast, round tower of most 
warlike .air, looking down upon the precipice, delighted Willoughton more than nny 



 

other. A part of the edifice, repaired and 
adorned in the time of James the First, 
containing the state rooms, which run in a 
long line upon the steep, was not in harmony with this tower, and gave very different ideas of the character and manners of the respective ages to which they 
belonged. The moonlight touched this 
tower with a fine solemnity, and felPon 
the tops of the dark cedars and other trees, 
that clothe the precipice, as it glanced to 
Shakspeare's stream below, where it rested 
in all its silver radiance, as if pleased to 
claim it for its home. 

Willoughton leaned over the bridge, and 
looked upon the scene in silence. The 
brightness of the river, the dark, clear 
shade of the woods, reflected on its margin and rising with majesty up the steep, 
with the grey towers, in softened light, 
crowning all, formed a harmony of tints 
and of objects such as he had not often 



 

seen, and which recalled to him that 
state of holy peace he had so lately experienced. 

Amidst the stillness of this scene, there 
arose a strain, as if commanded by Shakspeare's wand, and to which his words might 
have been applied. u O ! it came o'er mine 
ear, like the sweet south, that breathes 
upon a bank of violets," It was the music 
of French-horns, sweetened by distance and 
by the water, over which it passed, accompanied by a few voices addressing the river 
and celebrating the bard in the well-known 
song of Garrick and Arne, — " Thou softflowing Avon ! " 

Nothing could exceed the beauty of 
some of the cadences, prolonged by the 
deep, mellow tones of the horns, or of the 
chorus, and of the close, that gave these 
words : — 

" The fairies by moonlight dance round the green 
bed, 
For, hallow'd the turf is, that pillows his head." 



 

They brought tears into the eyes of 
Willoughton, and drew from him a deep 
sigh long after silence had returned. 

Mr. Simpson looked about to discover 
whence this charming tribute to the memory of the loved poet came, and perceived 
two little boats stealing along the margin 
of the stream, under shadow of the bank 
that rose to the castle. The white awning 
of the first betrayed it to his eye, before it 
emerged on the moonlight ; and now the 
measured trampling of the oars told its 
departing course upon the waters, till 
once again that chorus died along the air, 
and then the steps of the oars were heard 
no more. 

The travellers remained for some moments, as if spell-bound, in thoughtful 
silence ; and they left this enchanting 
scene, and returned to their inn, without 
having uttered a word. This was an un


 

usual mood with Mr. Simpson ; he had 
caught it from his companion, rather than 
from the scene ; and now, on the entrance 
of supper, he rejoiced to get rid of it, and 
to return to the more substantial pleasures 
of this world. 

Willoughton, when he had retired to his 
chamber, and had, as was his custom, looked 
out upon the night, now overcast with gloomy clouds, sat down to examine his manuscripts, instead of seeking repose. Bound 
up with that of the " Trew Chronique," 
was another, entitled " A Trew Historie of 
two Mynstrells, that came by night to the 
Priory of Saint Margaret, and what they 
disclosed, and what one in the convent by 
his art, proved them to bee." This " Trew 
Historie" was more difficult to be deciphered than the " Trew Chronique," and 
Willoughton left it for the present, and 
took the " Boke of Sprites." 

 



 

As he turned over the leaves, curious to 
see the thraldom of superstition to which 
the peolpe of a remote age were liable, he 
often smiled at the artless absurdities he 
discovered, the clumsy inventions practised 
upon the fears of the ignorant by the venality of the monks. Yet he sometimes 
found his attention seized, in spite of himself, by the marvellous narratives before 
him ; till, at length, he began to feel that 
he was alone, to recollect that it was past 
midnight, to observe that all around him 
was still as death ; and gradually to think 
he might as well lay aside the " Boke 
of Sprites" till day-light should return 
and the world again sound busily around 
him. 

He did so, and again took the " Trew 
Chronique," desirous of ending his longday, with some new traits of an age so 
distant from his own and of the stvle, in 



 

which they might be shadowed forth. The 
mere spelling did not render this so difficult, as the character in which it was written, with its abundance of abbreviations 
and contractions. 

The following is a modernized copy, 
which he afterwards wrote out for the 
amusement of a friend, who was fond of 
the subjects it touched upon, but had 
not industry enough to work his way 
through the obstructions of the original. 
In this copy, while Willoughton endeavoured to preserve somewhat of the air of 
the old style, without its dryness, he was 
often compelled to regret, that much of the 
effect of the story was lost, with the simplicity, brevity and quaintness of the ancient manner. However, he often retained 
the old words, where they did not seem to 
form too glaring a contrast with the modern style, and, now and then, somewhat 
 



 

of the quaintness of the original, the title 
of which ran thus : — 

Conteumxge a treto tfjromciue of foijat pa^sictr at 
Btlltngtoorti), in ffrfcenn, tot)eu <©ur J>oberen 
£ovfc, tfje %»n&> kept tt)er $te fest of 
J?en$t fHtriiei ; fotti) ne marbenlous 
accftent, tt)at tljct btfcl, at ti;e £0= 
lempntesa^ion of tt)c marriage 
of 4§a$ton tie 23lonttcutUe. 
rait!) tftoerS tfjtngs, cu 
rtouS to be fenoion, 
tfjercunto purtamv 
tng. EHttf) an 
account of tf)e 
grcteCurnei), 
tijer fjcXtr 
tntfjc 

MCCLVI. 

Cijangetf out of tfje Gorman tongue 

33j> (^rpmbaltJ, tfSonk of &zn\t $larie 

priori in &(Utngfoortf). 



THE FIRST DAY. 



THE FIRST DAY. 

At the head of this chapter was a drawing, of 
the King and Queen, with their train, passing under 
the towers of Kenilworth. Near the King rode a 
young knight of a very spirited air ; in one hand he 
held his cap, bending towards the King, who seemed 
to be speaking to him, and with the other he reined 
in his fiery courser. At some distance, was a man 
pressing through the crowd, with eager gesticulation 
and a wild countenance, towards the King. The 
royal banner, on the tower above, was tinged by the 
setting sun, and the arms and caps of the soldiers 
on the battlement there glistened with the rays. 
The cap of one of these, who, as if to obtain a longer 
view of the King, appeared to have stretched too 
far forward, was falling on the multitude below; 
some of whom were laughing. 



FIRST DAY. 



It was at the feast of Saint Michel, 
that King Henry, the third of his name, 
with his Queen and sundrie of the nobles 
of the realm and a marvellous train of 
estates and gentils, came to keep court in 
Ardenn, at his castle of Kenilworth. The 
day was drawing to an end ere they arrived : and it was a goodly sight to see 
this noble company coming over the forest, till then so lonesome ; and the last 
light of this day's sun glittering upon the 
helmets and lances of the King's guard ; 
likewise on the gorgeous apparelling of 





their horses and trumpets, with their banners unrolled, that went before his grace ; 
also on the litters of the Queen, covered 
with cloth of gold and with tapestry of 
rich colours, brought from her own land 
beyond the sea. 

This noble train, with all the spear-men 
attendant on the King, was like unto a 
little army covering the paths and tracks, 
for many miles, as they wound amongst 
the woods of Ardenn ; or like unto some 
mighty river, that flowing along, appears, 
where the shades open, in shining bends 
upon the plain, and is lost again as they 
enter beneath the gloom ; but yet may 
you judge of their course throughout all 
the prospect. Like as you may the broken lines of the great aqueduct, stretching over the plains of our dear father of 
Rome ; which, as we perceive its distant 
points athwart those solitudes, we connect 
in our minds into one great whole, grander 



 

in its sweep than it might have shown 
when it stood complete. 

There went before the King a hundred 
archers in pairs, sumptuously apparelled, 
and having the feathers of their arrows 
stained with green ; the horns sounded 
before them through the woods : then 
fifty demi-lancemen, two abreast ; then 
fifty pike-men ; then trumpets, with their 
banners also displayed ; then officers at 
arms, in their sur-coats, the Serjeants with 
their maces. In the midst was borne up 
the royal banner, by six of the standardbearers : the pipes of it were of silver, 
and were slided along the banner-staff; 
which was held with horn in a girdle of 
white leather, embroidered, worn by the 
King's chief standard-bearer. 

The King's Highness came riding on a 

noble grey, widely encompassed about with 

pikemen, and attended by divers nobles 

of the realm and by knights and gentils, 

 



 

without number. His Highness wore that 
day a cloak of purple velvet, lined with 
yellow satin, and furred with martin and 
ermine ; on his head was a cap of black 
velvet, bearing a sable plume. His countenance was goodly and gracious, and he 
often turned and spoke to those about 
him. 

On his right hand, rode the young 
Prince Edward, holding in his fiery charger, 
yet looking as though he would fain spur 
him to the top of his speed. Next to him 
rode the Archbishop of York. On the 
King's left, was his brother, the Earl of 
Cornwall. The Bishop of Coventry would 
have been there, but he was then lying 
sick on his bed ; but the Prior and divers 
of the monks attended on the King. 

First amongst the knights, that waited 
on his grace, was Gaston de Biondeville, 
a young Provencal; whom King Henry had 
raised, for some daring exploits in his do


 

minions beyond the sea, to be a knight of 
his household. He was of comely person 
and gallant air ; and managed his proud 
charger with such easy grace, as a lady 
might, with silken bandage, guide a fawn. 
He wore a cloak of pale olive, lined and 
guarded with rose colour ; his cap was of 
velvet like to it, and he wore his feathers 
in the French fashion : for he was of the 
Queen's country, and had all the gaiety 
of her nation in his countenance and 'haviour. 

Yet were there some in the court, men 
of English ground, who liked him not ; it 
may be, because he was a stranger in our 
land, or that he bore a proud defiance in 
his eye, or that they envied him his favour 
with the King. 

Some way before the Queen, went fifty of 
the foresters of Ardenn clothed in green, 
sounding their horns. She was in her litter, tapestried with cloth of gold, and she 



 

was compassed all about with her ladies 
and her nobles and esquires. Her litter was borne by two brave coursers, right 
richly trapped with velvet, and led by 
pages apparelled in sumptuous liveries ; 
other pages, in 'broidered doublets, went 
beside her, or following. Then came her 
master of the horses, leading her palfrey, 
very richly appointed, the bridle and 
breast- chain studded with jewels, followed 
by another of her palfreys, led by a page. 
Her Highness was adorned in a close gown 
of velvet, 'broidered about with pearls, and 
bearing upon her head a great hood of 
black velvet, richly sewed with large pearls. 
Following her Highness, came her ladies 
and gentlewomen mounted on fair palfreys, 
richly appointed and apparelled ; a goodly 
company. 

Then came her Highness's chariot empty, drawn by six horses, led by pages in 
jackets of scarlet damask, with the Eng


 

lish crown 'broidered on their backs. They 
bore in their caps a white feather ; dropping aside, in the manner of France, whereat the people murmured, and well they 
might ; for such a sight of strangers, from 
her own land, the like was never seen ! 
But the Queen bore herself so graciously towards the people, smiling upon them with 
her comely countenance, that she won away 
their discontent. Other gentlewomen of 
her court followed her car, mounted on 
palfreys. 

Next came Eleanor, the widowed Countess of Pembroke, the King's sister, now 
Countess of Leicester, in her litter, with a 
sumptuous train : and then Cincia, the 
Countess of Cornwall, the sister of the 
Queen, right freshly apparelled, and sumptuously attended by noble dames and gentils ; and a sight of people followed, in the 
different liveries of their masters. 

Before the Queen, went her mynstrels 



 

of music ; who, when they came nigh to 
Kenilworth, began to blow upon their pipes, 
and to strum their stringed instruments 
with most sweet noise — so that the bells of 
a village there, which were rung for mirth, 
could not be heard so far. 

Amongst the damsels attending the 
Queen, none were so fair as the lady Isabel, daughter of the Earl of Arundel, and 
the lady Barbara, daughter of the Earl of 
Huntingdon ; who followed her Highness, 
on white palfreys. Ychon of them was 
beautiful beyond thought : the lady Isabel was the more stately and carried a 
higher brow ; but Lady Barbara's smiles 
were blyther than the morn. 

Soon as the towers of Kenilworth showed themselves upon the West, which, if 
it had not been for the glowing spears 
of those on the battlements, would hardly 
have been known from the dark woodtops, — soon as they appeared, some half


 

score of the foresters rode forward with 
their bugles, to give sign of the King's approach ; but were straight sounded back 
by the trumpets, which blew up a blast, 
that filled the forest, and echoed to the 
very castle walls, ere the proud trumpeters would stop. 

Then his Highness courteously commanded, that those who had come forth 
so many miles, to welcome him on his 
way, should be appointed to proclaim 
him at the gates. They waited not for 
second bidding; but, tuning up so clear 
and sweet, set spurs to their hobbies, and 
flew swiftly as the arrows from their own 
bows. 

All the way hence to Kenilworth was 
lined with other troops of foresters in 
green ; who, at certain distances, saluted 
the King, as he passed, with their bugles, 
in spite of the trumpets, that charged so 
loud and shrill their minet-flourishes : and 



 

they followed in the Queen's train. The 
King's pike-men and lance-men going 
after of all. 

At the first sound of the bugles before 
the gate, you might see the great banner 
of England raised upon the keep of Kenilworth. Then, the chief wardour of the 
castle appeared upon the turret ; though he 
stayed not long there, but went down to 
join his lord, in their service at the gate. 
The archers behind the battlements stood 
in order ; other bow-men and the lancemen ranged themselves behind the towerwalls, and the trumpets there answered 
the summons, with a blast, that shook the 
forest, and made the fair waters of the valley tremble ; roughening the portraiture 
of towers and woods, which had seemed 
to sleep upon their surface, as in a glass 
of chrystal. 

Then the Lord Constable, coining down 
from the keep, followed by a posse of his 



 

officers, took to horse and went out to meet 
the King. As he turned out of the gate, 
he met the Prior of Saint Mary's, with 
the twelve canons, and a long train processioning, all in full ceremony, bearing 
precious reliques, to welcome his Highness ; 
after them came the priest and sundry of 
the parish-church, singing. 

The press of people, from all the country about, was so thick, that hardly could 
the monks make way among them. The 
castellan, a man proud and jealous of his 
high place, was not well pleased, that 
they should try to present themselves to 
the King, before himself; but they were 
soon right glad to follow in his train, for 
strait as he appeared, the crowd was 
forced back, and they passed, without 
difficulty, in that wise, full three furlongs. 

The castellan, coming in presence of 
his Highness, leaped from his horse, and, 
on his knee, presented him the keys of 



 



 

the castle, on a rich plate ; the which his 
Highness readily delivered to him again, 
with a gracious speech, bearing, that they 
were well in his custody. Then, the Prior 
and canons of Saint Mary's showed themselves in procession, with banners, and 
chaunting sweet anthems, and his Highness looked kindly on them ; after which 
they went on to the Queen, and, paying 
duty, attended her to the castle. But 
my Lord Constable, remounting his horse, 
rode bareheaded before his Highness, to 
the very gates. 

Immediately before the King, was borne 
his sword of justice, by the Lord Hubert 
de Lacey ; where, on the sheath, you might 
behold, in letters of rubies, these words, 
" Truth and Right." As he passed all 
the people cried out, " King Henry, King 
Henry, long live King Henry ! and blessings on your sweet-favoured visage !" 

Then, they threw forth on the air, for 



 

joy, among other tokens, corn and flour ; 
so that many of the nobles of the realm, 
nay, some of the King's guard, liked it 
not, for the flour-dust, falling on their 
garments, disguised them like unto grinders of corn : but they held their peace, 
as needs must, passing on in solemn stateliness. 

Before the cjstle-gates, a great show 
of the King's bow-men were drawn out 
to receive him, and the courts within were 
lined, and every tower and battlement was 
thronged with his soldiers. There, too, 
were the foresters ready at the gates, who, 
on the King's approach tuned up their 
merry bugles, with might and main ; as 
though one breath sounded through the 
whole of them. But, when the heralds 
passed under the towers, their trumpets 
took their revenge, for they gave many 
blasts, that made every court within shake 
for joy ; and showed more like a triumph 



 

of war than a flourish of festival. They 
on the ramparts now seemed to take the 
hint, and joined them with such warriorsounds of fierce disdain, that the clear 
bugle seemed but as a shepherd-pipe beneath them, and, for a season, was not 
heard at all. 

Certes, the noise of the trumpets and 
cornets, the clanging of bells, the trampling of horses over the bridge, the striking 
of swords upon shields, with, ever and 
anon, the shouts of the multitude, astounded cattle and fowl in the woods, far 
and wide. Old wives and they that might 
not leave their homes for sickness could 
hear the mingled uproar ; and could know 
as surely, when the King reached Kenilworth, as those, who had journeyed thither to behold him. And many an outlaw 
in the forest, who feared to show his face 
among the crowd, lay hearkening in his 
den, or stalked under the old oaks, while 



 

he watched the minutes of the coming 
twilight, and reckoned on the booty he 
should seize from careless travellers, returning, at night, to distant towns. 

Some too there were, who, in the pathless holds of this forest, heard the far-off 
voice of joyance and society, with bitter 
grief; finding out, too late, they were not 
made for that lonesomeness of heart their 
thoughtless vices had condemned them to. 
Alas ! for such, let them shrive and betake 
themselves, as penitents, to holy cloister. 

When the Queen's litter came near the 
gates of the castle, her minstrels of music 
sang with most sweet glee, and the bugles 
saluted her as she passed into the barbican, 
or first tower of defence ; but, soon as she 
appeared on the draw-bridge, the trumpets 
from the ramparts blew up a flourish, and 
then the minstrels stopped, though they 
had not finished their fit. And they did 
well ; for hardly could there be heard the 



 

trampling of the horses' hoofs upon the 
bridge, nor the distant music in the courts 
before the King. The walls and turrets, 
thronged with faces, seemed to be alive, 
and to shout, as with one voice, " Queen 
Eleanor ! Queen Eleanor ! long live Queen 
Eleanor!" — but some few were heard to 
shout, " Away with the foreigners ! — 
away with all foreigners !" which the good 
Queen seemed not to hear, though she 
guessed in her heart what they said ; and 
many a noble knight and lady near her 
knew well. She, with unchanged countenance, showed only sweet smiles to those 
numberless eyes, darting from the walls 
and battlements, all turned upon her litter, 
as it passed over the bridge, glittering in 
the last beams of this day's sun, and then 
entered beneath that deep and dark archway of the great tower, leading into the 
base court. 

Beyond, in the sunshine, could be seen 



 

the King's Highness, preceded by the Lord 
Constable, and having the Archbishop on 
his right and Prince Edward on his left, 
passing forward to the upper court ; where, 
on the steps, stood the marshals of the hall, 
the stewards, the esquires of the household, 
with many officers of the castle, waiting to 
receive him, some with chains of gold on 
their necks : the royal banner waving over 
all. They stood so thick, looking over one 
another's shoulders, face above face, on the 
steps there, that they seemed like a rampart of heads ; while, below them, in the 
same court, the lance-men and yeomen of 
the household stood waiting to receive the 
Queen. 

And truly it was a pleasureful sight, to 
behold that vision of light appearing beyond the deep portal, under which stood, 
on either hand, the wardours in their niches, to the number of eight ; so dim, they 
showed like shadows more than substance, 






albeit, they did not lack of that. And a 
more delightful sight it was to behold the 
Queen and all her train, winding through 
that dark arch into the beams beyond ; the 
rich trappings of steeds and men, their 
breast-plates and spears and steel caps, ail 
glancing in the setting sun. There, too, 
you might see, through the higher bars 
of the portcullis, the windows of the great 
chamber hung out with tapestry of silk 
and cloth of gold. 

But that, which caused some surprise to 
those who watched without, was a sudden 
turmoil, that appeared around the King in 
the court, just as the Queen's litter was 
advancing forth of the arch-way. A man 
was seen forcing himself among the guards, 
towards his Highness, who turned his face 
backwards in the sun, as if to see what 
was going on ; and seemed to rein in his 
steed, while he held forth his right arm to 
Sir Gaston de Blondeville, who, with cap 



 

in hand, leaned forward on his courser, as 
if receiving some command. The while, 
the heads and spears of soldiers gathered 
round, moving in tumultuous hurry, rising 
and falling incessantly, like unto those 
stormy white tops coming on over a darkened sea. 

On a sudden, the King disappeared : 
some thought he had fallen from his steed, 
struck by the hand of the stranger ; and 
then, such was the throng of people beyond 
the portal to get forward for more certainty, that hardly could the Queen's guard 
keep them back, till his Highness was seen 
ascending the steps of the high court. 

At last, out of the midst of the confusion a shield was seen raised upon the traversed spears of six soldiers, and borne 
towards the outer gate, having upon it a 
man stretched, as if dead. But at the 
great portal the soldiers stopped, and drew 
aside to make way for the Queen ; his 

vol. I. F 



 

Highness, meanwhile, with his nobles and 
young knight, had withdrawn into the 
state apartments. 

When her Highness was gone by, they 
brought the man upon the shield into the 
free air without the walls, and lowered 
their burden on the grass ; but the tumult 
of the people was so great, (they suspecting that he had attempted the Kings life) 
that the soldiers with their spears had 
much ado to save him from their fury, or 
to keep a little space open around him. 

He was a man of goodly appearance, 
that lay there, seeming without life. Anon, 
he began to stir himself, and in a little 
while opened his eyes ; the which, when 
the people saw it, redoubled their fury ; 
and they demanded, that he should be had 
to prison, for " he has assailed the life of 
our good King [" With that they made 
such a roaring, that the shouts of the 
soldiers, who wanted to set them right. 



 

could not be heard, the women brawling 
louder than all of them together. 

Thus it went for some time : and then, 
the noise being hushed, they found out 
the man was innocent of what they had 
suspected. 

When the stranger had recovered himself a little, he stared wildly ; and, raising himself up, he looked round him, as if 
examining the countenance of every one, 
whom curiosity or anger had made to 
bend over him. And so he looked again 
and again, till they asked him, if he 
thought he saw the countenance of any 
one there, whom he knew. Then he 
fetched a deep sigh, and said, " I as surely 
saw him as I now breathe, but he is not 
here." 

Divers present then asked him, of whom 
he spoke, but he only muttered to himself, 
" I could not be deceived ; it is impossible for me ever to forget him." Then he 
 



 

shook from limb to limb, and was nigh 
going off into a swoon again. The people, meanwhile, pressed upon the soldiers 
to know what all this meant ; and curiosity and pity began to take the place of 
rage. 

The tale went, that, as King Henry had 
approached the entrance of the second 
court, this man, who had passed the portal 
amongst the King's horses, at the risk of 
his life, came beside him, and, having fixed 
his eyes with the greatest attention upon 
a knight of the King's household, cried 
out, " Justice ! most noble Henry." Then, 
as if unable to utter something he would 
have spoken, he fell down in strong convulsions, and was nigh being trampled to 
death. His Highness, seeing the condition 
of the man, had commanded he should 
be taken forth of the court, and aid administered to him ; and this was all the 
soldiers could tell. 



 

There were some amongst the crowd 
who thought they had seen him before, 
and questioned him of his name, and 
wherefore he had presumed to approach 
the King in such manner ; to all which 
he would nothing answer ; but seemed 
heavy at heart, and as if his very sadness 
would not let him speak ; only these words 
he uttered, once or more, — " It was he 
himself! I should have known him at 
Cairo !" 

Some still said they had seen the poor 
man before ; naithless he proved to be a 
stranger in Kenilworth. When he could 
walk, he was led back to the little hostel, 
where he had taken up his lodging, and 
there he remained closely hid from the 
eyes of every one, all that night. 



THE SECOND DAY. 



THE SECOND DAY. 



At the head of this chapter was a view of the 
tilt-yard, at the end of the great lake, with the 
towers of Kenilworth above. — In the lists were two 
armed knights, on foot, each poising his spear at 
the other. They were cased in complete steel ; 
their visors closed, each bearing on his helmet his 
plume and crest. There was somewhat very impressive in the station and in the whole appearance 
of these armoured figures. Each stood with his 
right foot advanced; the right arm, holding the 
spear, was raised high, displaying at once the 
strength and grace of an accomplished warrior. At 
the end and along one side of the tilt-yard, were 
galleries hung with tapestry, where sat the Queen 
and her ladies, and the King and his nobles, waiting 
to behold the encounter. The opposite sides were 
open to the lake, the woods, and the castle. 



THE SECOND DAY. 



In the morn, next after the King came 
to Kenihvorth, there was tilting in the 
great yard of the castle, at which his Highness, with the Queen and her court, were 
present. This was the day of Turney ; but. 
although this noble company made a goodly 
show, they were not apparelled with that 
splendour they showed on the chief day, 
as will be hereafter rehearsed. 

Among the ladies of the court, none surpassed for beauty the lady Barbara, daughter of the Earl of Huntingdon and a favourite damsel of the Queen ; her the King 
intended to bestow in marriage, during 




 

his sojourn in Ardenn. She was innocent 
and graceful, as the fawns that bound in 
our forest, and excelled in all the accomplishments of the court. She had fixed 
her heart on Sir Gaston de Blondeville, a 
young knight of the King's household, who 
had entreated her of her father in vain ; 
for, though he was of a good family, it was 
a foreign one, being of the Queen's country, 
and he had little besides the favour of his 
master to depend on. The youth was of 
a comely person and gallant bearing ; well 
practised in all martial exercises of war, 
of which he had given some proof in exploits, and had latterly so much displayed 
himself in a fierce adventure against some 
of King Henry's rebellious subjects, beyond 
sea, that his Highness had incontinently 
advanced him to be one of his own knights. 
Moreover, the King, on hearing of his illfaring suit, had taken that matter into his 
special cognizance ; and the King knew 





so well how to command the earl, that he 
consented to give his daugher to the knight, 
and his Highness determined the marriage 
should be solemnized forthwith. 

But, on this very first day, after his arrival, his spirit was ruffled by a strange 
accident. As his Highness was returning from the Tilt-yard, accompanied by the 
Queen, and attended by the whole court, 
his harpers playing before him, a stranger 
came forth of the crowd, and falling at his 
feet, called out boldly for justice. Many 
there present knew him for the man who, 
the night before, had showed such striking 
signs of a disturbed mind ; and now, noting 
his unseemly vehemence, they stopped 
and asked for what offence he demanded 
justice. The King, too, remembered him ; 
and listening what he should say, the man, 
observing that, addressed his looks and his 
voice eagerly to him, and exclaimed, that 
he demanded justice upon robbers and 



 

murderers who infested the highways of 
his kingdom with more violence and frequency than was ever known before, so 
that none of his peaceable subjects were 
safe from them. 

The King, seeing the wildness of his 
look and the strangeness of his gesture, 
guessed the man was not rightly himself; 
yet he commanded him forthwith into the 
castle, there to wait, till he should speak 
with him, or order some others to do so ; 
and the procession passed on. 

Meanwhile, the King determined not 
to leave this matter, till he should have 
seen something more about it, with his 
own discernment. He went speedily into 
the white hall, which was the court of 
justice, keeping only a few of his nobles 
and other attendants, where he summoned 
the stranger before him, and had question 
put to him, who he was and of what particular grievance he had to complain, 



 



The man answered, that his name was 
Hugh Woodreeve, a merchant of Bristol : 
and then he told his story — that, three 
years before, travelling with a very large 
sum of money in his possession, and, being 
in company with three other travellers, 
two of them merchants of good repute, 
and the other a kinsman of his own, they 
were attacked in the forest of Ardenn, 
when about two miles from Keniiworth, 
and robbed of nearly ail they carried. 
They did not part with it quietly, it was 
so much. His kinsman, however, was the 
only one of the party that had good arms ; 
he had served in the wars, and he now 
manfully resisted the ruffians, who directed most of their vengeance to him; he 
was murdered on the spot; for the rest 
of his company, they escaped with some 
hurts. No one of the robbers was killed, 
but two or three were wounded. 

Here the merchant stopped and seemed 



 

ready to sink. His Highness, having declared his indignation at this villany, assured the merchant, that justice should be 
done upon the guilty, if they could be 
found, and asked whether he could swear 
to them, if he should see them again. 
The stranger straight replied, that he 
could truly swear to the murderer, and 
that he had seen him in the very court, 
nay, that he saw him at that very instant, 
standing even beside the King's chair. 

King Henry, struck with astonishment, 
fixed his eyes sternly on the stranger, for 
a moment, and then looked at those 
around him. On his right hand, was his 
son, Prince Edward, and, on his left, his 
young favourite, Gaston de Blonde ville, 
upon whom all eyes were fastened; for 
to him the answer pertayned, and to him 
the accuser pointed, with a look of horror, 
which convinced every one present, except 
his Highness, he did indeed believe he 



 

saw before him the murderer of his friend, 
whether his fancy deceived him, or not. 
For the King himself, he inclined to think 
the accuser was either disordered in his 
mind, or that, from some unknown cause, 
he was the enemy of Sir Gaston ; and his 
Highness knew well of the unreasonable 
and deadly abhorrence, in which many 
of his subjects of Britain held some of 
those strangers from France, who had 
risen into favour. 

At the boldness of this accusation, Sir 
Gaston stood, at first, like one stricken 
with dismay ; then, moving his hand 
towards his sword, he said, u but for the 
presence of the King, my master, I should 
soon avenge me for so foul a slander." 

To which the merchant, now much 
more tranquil than he had been, said, 
" The same reason must restrain all ; but 
I do not need it : I would not set my life 






 

against that of an assassin ! I ask for 
justice from his Highness." 

At these words, Sir Gaston was hardly 
withheld from his accuser. King Henry 
commanded silence : and, as soon as all 
noise had ceased, he turned with a severe 
countenance to the stranger, and said, 
" Know you not, that he, whom you accuse is a knight of my household, advanced to honour for his valour ?" 

" Yea, noble King Henry," replied the 
merchant, " I have heard so ; but, I repeat, he is the man who killed my kinsman ! I never can forget that face : if I 
had met him in a distant land, I should 
have seized him for the murderer !" 

The King, more fully convinced of the 
unsoundness of his mind, said, " Your 
passion has deceived you ; thus far I am 
willing to pardon you; if you go farther, 
you must be taught what it is to dishonour a gentleman and a knight." 



 

Upon this, the merchant fell at the 
King's feet ; and, with uplifted hands, again 
cried out for justice ! Henry, hardly less 
astonished at the resolution of the man, 
than that one of his household should be 
thus accused, (although he might have 
bethought him of the law he had himself 
found it expedient to make heretofore at 
Kenilworth, respecting robberies then committed in a very extraordinary manner on 
the highways) — King Henry, though astonished, began to doubt. He fixed a look, 
in which there was somewhat of inquiry, 
upon Sir Gaston, whose visage was pale, 
though his eye was fierce ; but who may 
say, whether fear or anger maketh some 
men pale ? 

The King held it to be the last; a 
momentary doubt had entered his mind ; 
but he promptly dismissed it. His Highness was commanding, that the stranger 
should be removed ; and, for the present, 



 

confined in the castle ; when Prince Edward, who, young as he was, had closely 
observed all that had passed, craved humbly of the King, his father, to suffer the 
merchant to be further questioned ; and 
the King consented thereto. 

Then the man was asked, whether he 
could tell the year and the month, when 
the robbery he spoke of had been committed. He was ready enough with his 
answers, and said it was on the eighteenth 
of October, in the year twelve hundred 
and fifty-three, and on the chase ; that he 
was sure of the time, because it was within 
three days of that, when he should have 
paid to a goldsmith the most part of the 
money, whereof he was robbed. Upon 
this, the King seemed to consider awhile, 
for he knew, that, about that time, a 
camp lay in the neighbourhood of Warwick and on the edge of the forest, and 



 

that Sir Gaston was there, he being then 
serving as esquire to Sir Pierse Mallory. 

At the last words of the merchant, 
Sir Gaston moved towards the King, as 
though he would privily say something ; 
but his Highness reproved him with a 
frown ; and asked the merchant at 
what hour the robbery was committed, 
and what were the array and appearance 
of the robbers ? 

The knight interrupting the reply, then 
said aloud, "Sire! I entreat you, be mindful of the condition of disgrace, in which 
I must stand, if you seem to give countenance to this scandalous accusation. I 
know not, that I shall be able to breathe, 
if it be thought, that your Highness could, 
for one minute, think it possible I could 
have committed so foul a deed." 

King Henry, looking kindly upon him 
said, " It is right you should be cleared 
with those, who know you not so well as 



 



 



I do ; and chiefly with those, who love not 
men of your country ; and, therefore, 
would I examine this witless charge to 
the uttermost." His Highness then made 
all his questions over again. 

The merchant considered awhile, and 
somewhat of his boldness seemed to forsake him : he then answered, " the number of the robbers was three ; they were 
most of them tall in stature ; they wore 
cloaks about them, and had masks on 
their faces." 

" Masks ?" said the King. 

" Masks !" murmured the courtiers, 
with one voice. 

The King, daunting the accuser with 
the anger of his countenance, said, " You 
could swear to this knight, as one of the 
robbers, and yet you say, he had a mask 
on his face ! I suspect you now for an 
impostor more than for a moody man. If 
it prove so, tremble ! for I swear by my 



 

sword you shall not escape. I give you 
one more warning, to stop before you totally plunge into your ruin." 

At these words, delivered with vehemence, the paleness left Sir Gaston's face, 
and he made a profound obeisance, showing his gratitude to the King. The accuser, dismayed, could not immediately find 
his voice, as it seemed. Haply, he could 
not so speedily send back his thoughts to 
the rest of his story. Incontinently, the 
most of the assemblage began to look 
ychon in other's face. 

By-and-bye, the merchant said, that in 
the struggle between his companions and 
the robbers, two of the vizors fell off, and 
so he saw plainly the faces of the robbers, 
and he perfectly remembered the face of 
the knight. His Highness, without telling 
his thoughts on this, which many there 
present scrupled not to hold an afterinvention of the accuser, commanded him 



 

to begin his tale anew, and to tell, one 
by one, every particular he could bring to 
mind of the alleged adventure ; but before he began, Sir Gaston, surveying him, 
asked whether, about four years back, he 
was not at Embrun, in the Dauphin. 

Denying, that he had been at that place ; 
the accuser then renewed his story, which 
purported, that he and his companions 
were travelling, about the close of day, 
through the forest, or chase, of Kenilworth, 
when they were attacked by robbers. He 
was bidden to repeat the number of them 
and of his company, which he did, without 
varying his tale. The King asked how 
long after sun-set it was when the assault 
began ? which he could not readily tell : 
but said it was so nearly dark, that hardly 
could he see the figures of the robbers 
under the shade of the woods, from which 
they burst : the merchant paused a mo» 
ment — 





" Go on,"' said the King, impatiently : — 

 But I could, afterwards, see them 
plainly enough by a torch I took from 
my companions, who had lighted it, at 
a smith's in a village by the way-side ; an 
iron-smith's." 

The King asked him if he knew tho 
name of this village, but he knew it 
not ; and whether he should know the 
smith again ? and he answered, he thought 
he should. Then he was ordered to proceed with his story : 

" My kinsman," said he, " was the opsone of us, who was well-armed ; and a 
braver spirit never lived. He fought with 
his sword that man, who now stands beside your Highness ; it was a trusty weapon, and had done him good service in 
Syria, where he had it for booty, after a 
skirmish, as I heard. When my kinsman 
first made up to that man, I followed him 
with the torch, and to aid him, as I might, 


 

with an oaken staff I had in my hand ; 
but I received a blow upon the arm, that 
held the torch, which was knocked to the 
ground, and the vizor of the man fell also, 
that very man, who now presses behind 
your Highness's chair. The torch was not 
extinguished, and, by its light, I plainly 
saw that same countenance, that now 
glares upon me so vengefully. I saw it 
while he aimed the blow, which penetrated the head of my unfortunate kinsman, Reginald de Folville." 

The merchant paused, seemingly overcome by the remembrance of this event, 
while Sir Gaston exclaimed, — "Was it 
Reginald de Folville ? He was esquire to 
a knight of Saint John, and was then at 
Lydda: so much for the truth of your 
story in that main point." 

At the first words of Sir Gaston, the 
King and the courtiers had turned their 
faces upon him ; but though his words 



 

were so strong and sufficient, they beheld 
in his countenance paleness and consternation. But he soon recovered; and, asking 
pardon of his Highness for the emotion 
with which he had spoken, accounted for 
it by saying, that Reginald de Folville had 
been his earliest friend. 

"Your father's friend, you must surely 
mean," said the merchant ; " for he was at 
the wars at a time, that would have made 
that' possible. You must have been a child, 
when he went there." 

" I was then a child," said Sir Gaston, 
averting his eyes from the stranger ; u and 
I must ever remember the kindness he 
showed me after the death of my father ; 
I owe him much. He went from Provence to Syria ; I heard he fell in battle 
there. Sure I am he never returned : he 
died in battle there." 

" He died in the forest of Ardenn," said 
the merchant with solemnity, " and lies 

 



 

buried in the priory of Saint Mary here. He 
died by your hand : that is his very sword 
by your side ; I remember it now." 

The audacity of this assertion struck all 
present and none more than the King himself. His Highness desired to examine the 
sword, and asked the merchant why he 
had not sooner challenged it ; to which he 
answered nothing. Sir Gaston, as he delivered it on his knee to the King, said — 
" If I know my accuser, which I think I 
do, he is no stranger to this weapon : he 
knows well that I usually wear it ; but it 
never belonged to Reginald de Folville. 
My liege, it was my father's sword ; he 
won it in the plains of Palestine." 

The King examined it with attention. 
It was of eastern shape and finely wrought. 
In the hilt were a few jewels. Prince 
Edward, as he leaned over it, pointed 
out to his father a motto in an unknown 
tongue ; and then, at some distance below 



 

it, a date, with the Roman letters, H, A., 
remarking, that probably these letters alluded to some exploit achieved in the year 
noted. The King addressed himself to 
Sir Gaston for the meaning of the motto 
and of these letters ; but he knew not 
their meaning, and said they were as when 
his father won the sword from his enemy. 

Then the King addressed the merchant 
with the same question, observing, that, as 
the sword seemed to be familiar to him, he 
probably had been told the signification of 
the letters on it. With that, the merchant 
was hastily advancing to receive it of one, 
to whom his Highness had delivered it; 
when he suddenly drew back, covered his 
eyes with his hand, and stood immovable. 
Those near almost expected to see him fall, 
as he had done before in the castle court 
on the night last past. Sir Gaston, at the 
same time, stepping forward, presumed to 
take it, and to deliver it again to the King, 
 



 

with these words : — " Your Highness will 
not tempt the villany of this man by 
putting him in possession of the sword 
he falsely claims." 

But the merchant claimed it not ; nor 
could he even endure to look upon it. 
Heavy sighs burst from him, while with 
eyes still covered with his hands, he said, — 
" That was the sword, with which the villain murdered him ; and can I endure to 
take it in my hand, and to look upon the 
blade, on which his life blood flowed ?" and 
he groaned more piteously than before. 

There were some in the hall, who instantly thought this sorrow of the merchant was a mimickry, and asked how it 
could happen, that his kinsman was killed 
by his own weapon ; to which, soon as he 
could recollect his thoughts, he made answer, that the robber, on wrenching the 
sword from his friend, struck him his 
death-wound with it. The King, return


 

ing the sword to the young knight, bade 
him keep it forthcoming till he should demand it of him again, and then said to the 
stranger these or such-like words : — 

" You, a man unknown to me and to 
mine, and without a name, except as far 
as you have declared one, have dared to 
come into my court, and to accuse to me 
one of my own servants, a gentleman and 
a knight, of a crime most foul and incredible. You have related your story, 
and I have waited patiently for some evidence, that the murderer of your kinsman, 
if, in truth, he were ever destroyed by violence, was Sir Gaston de Blondeville. I 
find none, except your story. And in this 
you have not scrupled to affirm, that you 
would have seized him for the murderer, 
even in a distant land, though you also 
say, that your knowledge of his countenance was obtained only from the sudden (and, therefore, the uncertain) light of 


 

a torch lying on the ground, at a moment, 
when the danger you were yourself exposed to, might, it may be readily believed, 
have prevented you from closely observing 
any face whatsoever. You must be held 
unworthy of credit ; and I commit you into 
safe custody, till it shall be discovered 
who you are, and who those are, who 
urged you to this base accusation." 

When his Highness had ended, they 
were going to convey away the merchant 
from his presence, but he craved leave to 
speak, and it was granted. 

" My liege," said he, " at any other than 
that moment of horror, I might have seen 
the face of this stranger, without remembering it the next; but the impression 
made, at that moment, will remain with 
me, as long as the strong feelings, which 
then struck me, shall return with the recollection of my kinsman's fate, On seeing the same face, I was seized with the 



 

same horror ; your Highness's people can 
be witnesses, that yester-eve, when I saw 
that knight, I fell into convulsions, and 
was carried senseless from your presence." 

His Highness, remembering what had 
happened, and, on inquiry, finding, that 
this was the very man, who had then 
fallen senseless, perceived, that the merchant had not spoken this untruly. He 
asked again whether he was known to 
any person in Kenilworth, also whether 
either of the merchants, travelling in his 
company, at the period of the alleged 
murder, was at hand. The accuser stood, 
for a while, bewildered, and then repeating, that he was a stranger, having only 
passed through the place, a few times, 
on his way to or from Coventry, said, that 
of his two companions one was dead, 
and the other following his merchandize, 
in a distant land. 

Then," said the King, " it appears you 



 

cannot bring any evidence of the truth of 
your story ; even so far, as that a robbery 
was actually committed. Your accusation of this knight is, therefore, likely to 
be impelled either by malice, or by some 
other bad motive. If it shall prove so, 
dread the punishment that awaits you." 

" My liege," said Sir Gaston, " I think 
I know the man, and also his motive. He 
wronged my father at Embrun; and now 
his malice, — but this story is connected 
with family circumstances, that should 
only be divulged to your Highness ; and, 
if you will suffer me to unfold them in 
private, I shall prove, not mine innocence 
only — for of that your Highness does not 
doubt — but that man's former and present 
guilt." 

At these words, the stranger fell again 
on his knees, and besought aloud justice 
on " a villain." 

The King looked long upon him and 



 

upon Sir Gaston, and sat pondering awhile. 
He then turned to the merchant, and, 
bidding him rise, asked him, a second 
time, if he were not known to any one 
person in Kenilworth ? and received for 
answer, " Only as a traveller." 

" An adventure as remarkable as that 
you have related," pursued his Highness, 
" must have been known here at the time 
it happened, and must be remembered 
now. It is strange, if there be none who 
can recollect you also." 

" My lord," observed Prince Edward, 
" he said his friend was buried here in 
the priory. If so, the prior must know 
him and his strange history." 

'Said he so?" quoth the King; and, 
turning to the stranger, he inquired how 
it happened, that he was not known to the 
prior? and who it was that commanded 
the burial of his kinsman. 

The merchant said, he had himself org 





dered it, and had conversed with a monk 
and even with the Prior himself. 

" Then you are known to the Prior, at 
least," said the King ; " he will surely recollect your story : let him be sent for. It 
is strange you should have said you were 
unknown : you are either guilty of falsehood, or your senses are unsettled." 

The stranger raised his hand to his head 
and sighed.  I recollect the Prior," said 
he, " but he may not remember me." 

" We shall see !" said the King, calmly, 
as he rose from his chair : " If you are 
innocent, fear not ! if you are guilty, you 
will lose your life, in seeking that of an 
innocent mam" 

As his Highness left the hall, he looked 
somewhat sternly upon the accuser, and 
commanded, that he should be held in 
close custody, while more inquiry should 
be made. He then ordered Sir Gaston to 
attend him in his privy-chamber, and so 



 

i 

departed forth of the hall, leaving the 
accuser speechless and dismayed. 

As the merchant was led through this 
court of the castle to the tower, where 
was his prison, the lady Barbara, sitting 
in her bower- window above, saw the passing crowd, and inquired the occasion of 
it ; but none would inform her. While 
she gazed with curiosity, she observed Sir 
Gaston going to the King's privy chamber ; 
he looked not at her window, but went 
his way with a hurried step, and with 
such a countenance as she had never witnessed in him, till this time. At length, 
word was brought to my lady, her mother, 
of what had passed before his Highness. 
The Earl, her father, was promptly filled 
with disgust ; and thought the occurrence 
would be sufficient to prevent the marriage, which neither his English heart, nor 
his pride of ancient blood, had suffered 
him to approve. His daughter, the lady 



 

Barbara, was differently minded ; she 
would not believe him she loved capable 
of even a dishonourable action, much less 
of so foul a one ; and, assured of his innocence, she would have thrown herself at 
the King's feet, had that seemed always, 
as it did at first, proper, to urge his Highness to clear Sir Gaston instantly from the 
suspicion. 

But truly the King needed no advocate 
for Sir Gaston de Blondeville ; and so she 
thought, at last. His Highness's own inclination was sufficient ; and so angered 
was his generous spirit by what he held 
to be not only a false, but a malicious accusation, that he had determined after 
proof of this, to give a signal warning by 
the accuser's doom ; and this not only 
to prevent other false accusations proceeding from private motives, but to reprove 
and caution those of his subjects, who had 
a public prejudice against strangers, and 



 

were too likely to delight in the ruin of 
such especially as had risen to honours. 

The King, therefore, willingly gave audience privately to the young knight, that 
he might explain to him the circumstances, which should assure him of his 
innocence. What Sir Gaston told his 
Highness was never assuredly known ; 
some reports went on one side of the matter, some on the other : there was not one 
witness of what passed. Who then might 
know, unless they could guess by the countenances, and by what passed, when the 
hearing was over ? But, if they had gone 
by no other guide, they would have been 
all for the knight, since he had made the 
King quite convinced ; and moreover, the 
Earl of Huntingdon was summoned to the 
closet, where the King promised him the 
honour of the young knight would always 
remain unsullied in his opinion ; and so 
commanded, that the marriage with the 



 

lady Barbara should be solemnized, as 
had been before appointed, on the day 
next following. 

The Earl besought, nay, as some say, 
dared to remonstrate, that the marriage 
should be postponed till the stranger 
should have been lawfully convicted of 
falsehood ; but his Highness said, " Nay ; 
lest it should seem that the accusation 
was probable enough to require such delay. It is already well-known, as a matter 
agreed upon, that the nuptials are to be 
held on the morrow, the preparations are 
nearly all made, and they are public. It is 
necessary for the honour of Sir Gaston de 
Blondeville, that the appointment should 
be kept. If you are not convinced, still 
you will not be required to make disavowal of any thought you may have ; for 
I myself will lead your daughter to the 
porch, and will so, by my presence and 
by this act of parental kindness, show my 




estimation both of the fair bride and of 
him who shall become your son. Farther 
proof of my regard shall not be wanting 
hereafter." 

His Highness was peremptory, and the 
Earl, swayed by his master's positive opinion, and, it maybe, by that promise of regard hereafter, at last obeyed. 

While these things were passing in the 
King's chamber, the unhappy merchant 
was taken to a turret of the castle, called 
Caesar's Tower ; and there, with nothing 
but a pallet and the bare walls, was left to 
think of his jeopardy. What his thoughts 
were I know not ; but he was heard sorely 
to sigh and groan, and with good reason ; 
for, if he knew himself perjured, he knew 
also, that he should find no mercy from the 
King ; and, if innocent, he could expect 
little justice against so great a favourite. 
But, whatever were his meditations, they 
held not till night, for he was called and 



 

led forth of the tower into the presence of 
the King ; and, before even-song, the Prior 
of Saint Mary's was in attendance upon his 
Highness. He was not an aged man, yet 
was he a stern one. When he was asked 
whether ever before he had seen the merchant, he answered resolutely, that he had 
no knowledge of him. The same question 
being put to the merchant, touching his 
knowledge of the Prior, he returned a like 
answer. 

At this seeming self-contradiction, the 
King could scarcely command his anger, 
till it was discovered, that a Prior of Saint 
Mary's had died, since the time when the 
murder was alleged to have been committed, and that it must needs be he, whom 
the merchant meant. 

" But, where is the monk, with whom 
you consulted ? " asked the King ; can you 
tell his name ? " 

;t His name was Ewdwyn," replied the 
merchant. 



 

" He died yesternight !" said the Prior. 

At this there was a pause, and a dead 
silence throughout the chamber. Sir Gaston looked darkly on his accuser ; his 
accuser directed his eyes to the King and 
then on high ; but, in a short minute, he 
fell down, as though he were a dying man. 
The King, touched at his sufferings, commanded him from his chamber, that aid 
might be administered unto him. And 
then, that he might know whether this accusation of Sir Gaston were through malice, 
or mistake— for now pity inclined him to 
think the last — and also, that Sir Gaston 
might have mistaken, when he took this 
for the man, of whose deeds at Embrun he 
had talked ; that he might know the truth 
on all this, he ordered the Prior to make inquiry in his community, whether the body 
of any person known to have been murdered in the forest of Ardenn, three years 
before, had been deposited in the chapel, 
or in the cemetery of the convent. Like


 

wise, he commanded the Prior to have 
inquiry made in Kenilworth, whether any 
person remembered such an accident, or 
any house had received the dead body. 
And this he ordered, that it might always 
be seen he had desired to have justice done 
towards the wretched merchant, as well as 
for Sir Gaston de Blondeville. 

This being appointed, the King departed 
to his great chamber, there to keep his 
state; the Prior to his convent, to resume 
his spiritual musings ; the accused lover to 
his mistress ; and the merchant was conveyed to his prison tower. 

The King kept state, that night, with the 
Earl of Cornwall, the Archbishop of York, 
the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of 
Lincoln, Henry de Wernham, his chaplain, 
who also had the custody of the Great 
Seal, the Earl of Norfolk, the Earl of Hereford and a number of other nobles of the 
realm ; but the Queen kept her state apart. 



 

The King's great chamber was marvellous to behold. There were twenty-five 
wax-lights held by esquires of the household, all in the King's livery, gentils as they 
were ; also twenty-five wax torches were 
fixed high up over the tapestry. The walls 
were, that night, gorgeous with the story 
of Troy-town in ancient tapestries ; there 
you might see the flames burning and the 
towers falling, and old King Priam, with 
heard as white as snow, his crown upon his 
head, and his Queen Hecuba tearing her 
dishevelled locks for grief. And there was 
that renowned son, who carried off his 
aged father, with his little child holding 
by his garment, and his wife following, all 
disconsolate. This was a piteous sight to 
see pourtrayed ; but that it were nothing 
save a heathen story. — 

The floor of that chamber was not 
strewed either with rushes or with litter of 
any sort, but was laid in little checquers 



 

of divers colours ; and, where his Highness 
sat, under his cloth of state, was spread a 
silken carpet of full crimson, fringed about 
with gold, as likewise his chair and canopy 
of estate. But the finest sight was the cupboards, piled up with plates and cups 
of gold and silver, in readiness for the 
King, when he should take his voide. 
These were in that great Oriel, which his 
Highness had newly made in this chamber, 
before the bay ; and which was closed 
about with painted glass from the highest 
cup- board to the arched roof, where hung 
a silver lamp, that made the whole glow 
with its light. 

There were, that night, piaying in the 
chamber, the King's twelve minstrels, all 
clothed, for his honour and dignity, in 
sumptuous livery, with their virger to 
order their pipyngs and blowings. There 
were, besides, the children of the chapel 
singing, at times, from the brown gallery ; 
so that, the doors being open, you might 



 

have heard them through all that side of 
the castle ; and those, who sat afar off in 
the great hall, needed none other music. 

There also was Maister Henry, the versifier, whose ballad of the Giant of Cornwall was this night rehearsed to the harp 
by Richard, the King's harper, as was his 
famous Chronicle of Charlemagne, which 
lasted, till his Highness was well nigh 
weary, when he jocularly called out, having tasted of his golden cup, that Henry 
should have a butt of wine w ith his wages, 
if he would shorten his ballads by one-half. 
Maister Henry, who was a Frenchman, 
took this in good part, and, having especial 
care ever after to make his ballads nigher 
to too short than too long, became, in time, 
a notable rhymer. But let those do so who 
can. Some are famous one way, some 
another ; for mine own part, I must be 
circumstantial, or else nothing, as this 
" Trew Chronique" in due time must show. 

That night, the King played at " Check


 

ere" with the Earl of Norfolk, on a board 
laid with jasper and chrystal, the checkmen being of the same. Some said the 
king's and queens were of ebony, studded 
over with jewels, but of this I know not. 

But, the finest sight of all was the going 
of the chamberlain to the cupboard, accompanied of three nobles of the highest 
estate in the realm, that were there present, (save the King's family) to receive the 
King's cup and spice-plates ; and then the 
bringing up of the voide before his Highness. And, first, the usher, having assembled the King's sewers, their towels about 
their necks, with the four esquires of the 
body and the knights and esquires of the 
household, to the number of seventeen ; 
these, with divers other officers, being met 
at the cup-board, the Chamberlain took 
the King's towel, and, having kissed it, as 
the custom is, delivered it to the Earl of 
Norfolk, he being of the highest estate, 



 

who reverently received the same, and laid 
it safely upon his shoulder. Then, the said 
chamberlain gave the gold spice-plates covered to the Earl of Hereford ; and then 
the King's cup of massive gold, covered 
also, to the Earl of Warwick. At the 
same time were given to the knights of 
the household the Archbishop's spiceplate and cup, covered also, to be carried 
up, by the space of one minute after the 
King's. 

And, certes, it was a goodly sight to see 
all these nobles and gentils marching up 
the great chamber (the minstrels playing the while), compassed about with esquires, bearing great lights to the number 
of thirteen, especial care being taken, as 
the manner all times has been at the voide, 
that the lights were odd in number. 

First, then, went the usher, with his 
torch and rod, making passage ; the 
chamberlain, with his chain and wand of 



 

office ; then the five esquires, of the body, 
bearing wax-lights before the Earl of Norfolk, with the towel ; then, three esquires 
about the Lord of Hereford, bearing the 
spice-plates ; then, other three before the 
Lord Warwick, bearing the King's cup covered ; then followed one knight of the 
household, bearing a single torch ; so 
making up altogether the just number of 
lights. Amongst them went four knights 
of the household, well renowned for bravery and noble bearing, with the Archbishop's spice-plate and cup. 

When this array drew near to the King, 
he, standing up under his cloth of estate, 
which was rolled up high, with the young 
Prince Edward on one hand and theArchbishop on the other, the Chamberlain 
taking the covers from off the spice-plates, 
gave assaye unto the Earl of Gloucester. 
The King, before he took his spice, made 
a beck to the Archbishop, that he should 



  

take his first ; and the knights having 
advanced, as they well knew would be 
seemly, the Archbishop forthwith obeyed. 
But, when the Chamberlain uncovered 
the cup, all the minstrels in the chamber 
blew up louder than ever, and so held on 
till his Highness took the ypocras, so that 
every roof in the castle rung with joy. 

The King and Archbishop being served, 
his Highness's cup and spice-plates were 
again covered, but not so the Archbishop's. 
Then were the spice and cup carried to 
Prince Edward and the Earl of Cornwall, by the knights ; to the bishops by the 
esquires of the household, and to the other 
estates by the esquires also. Which being 
done, his Highness forthwith departed for 
" all night," the trumpets blowing before 
him. Then, were three healths drank, one 
to the King, one to the Queen, and one 
to the Prince Edward ; after which it 
were not meet, that the assemblage should 
vol. I. H 



 

remain, and straight the great chamber 
was avoyded of all there present. 

The Queen, that night, sat in her bower 
with all her ladies. There were mynstrelsy and dancing to the harp and viol. The 
Lady Barbara was the marveil of all, that 
beheld her moving to the sound of viols 
like unto some sprite, rather than to a poor 
mortal. Prince Edward danced with her 
a round, and the Queen often honoured 
her with her pleasing speech. Sir Gaston, 
though he beheld her, showed not his 
wonted joy. He stood apart looking on, 
and, when her Highness spoke to him, he 
seemed nigh to senseless of the honour. 

The dancing being ended, Pierre, a 
Norman and the Queen's chief minstrel, 
apparelled in the guise of his country, 
sang some of his ballads on the harp, in 
his own tongue, which, albeit, they were 
not esteemed like unto Maister Henry's, 
yet did they not displease. The first tuning 



 

was in words which have been thus rendered into English by one, who had 
learned much of the new speech, not then 
familiar, except with some few. 

THE BRIDAL. 

Lightly, lightly, bounded the roe, 
The hind o'er the forest was fleeing ; 

The small birds tuned on every bough, 
In sun and shade their gleeing. 

And purple cups, and silver bells 

From the green leaves were peeping ; 

The wild-rose smiled in the mossy dells : 
Nought but the thorn was weeping. 

And so bright in the sun its tears did shine, 
They showed like tears of pleasure ; 

And the airs of May, through the budding spray, 
Breathed joyance, without measure. 

For this was Isabel's bridal morn 

Who loved each bud and flower, 
The wild- wood shade, the mountain head, 

The deep vale's mead and bower. 




 

And now was her festival gaily kept 

By hagled brook and fountain, 
From the low green bank, where the violet slept. 

To the blue hill-top and mountain. 

And lightly, lightly, bounded the roe, 
His footstep wing'd with pleasure, 

And small birds sang from every bough, 
Welcomes beyond all measure. 



At the end of this ballad, the minstrel 
rang out his harp in full joyance ; and 
then, falling note by note, he dropped into 
a faltering murmur, as of deep sorrow, 
and so continued for some space, till those 
who heard him, perceived the witch of melancholy stealing upon them. 

The Queen, deeming such strain unsuitable to the time, commanded him to change 
the measure, and sound forth one more 
gay, a lay of Provence, her native land, 
whither she knew he had been for his 
learning ; but he, enthralled by the magic 





of his own mood, loving not to be commanded, still hung his head over the harp, 
listening to that pleasure-full melancholy 
and heeding nothing but its sweet sound. 

At last, being made to know fully 
her Highness's will, he sang the song of 
a Troubadour ; for, though he loved best 
the ditties of Normandy, his own land, 
there was scarce one of Provence, which 
he had not gained ; and the Queen did 
not let him forget them, so often did 
she command those, which she affected best. And now he sang forth to 
his harp a " roundel" in the Provencal 
tongue, made by a knight of the " Order 
of Fine Eyes." They, who then heard 
him, would have thought he loved any 
thing less than melancholy, so light and 
debonnaire was the music he rang out ; 
and many could hardly keep their steps 
from dancing to that gallant measure. 
But it lasted not long; for, making a 



 

pause and looking wistfully at the Lady 
Barbara, he struck forth, on a sudden, 
some of his deepest tones, with a wild yet 
solemn grace, such as brought tears into 
the eyes of many a fair lady, and darted 
dread into the heart of one there present. 
It seemed as if the shadows of prophecy 
were moving over the strings, and calling 
from them some strange and fearful story 
yet to be. And then again did the harper's voice steal trembling forth, as do the 
moon's beams, when pale clouds pass over, 
saddening, but not fully obscuring their 
brightness : yet might every one hear plainly all his words. Here it is done into 
English by the same hand ; but the verses 
be not all divided into equal numbers : — 

i. 

O'er the high western wolds afar,, 
Glimmer'd some lights of yesterday ; 

And there, one bright, but trembling star 
Among the streaky shadows lay. 



 

The traveller's lonely warning. 
But soon the winds, that sing day's dirge, 
Did o'er that star the shadows urge, 

And hung the night with mourning ! 



" What steps on the waste are beating?" 
He listened not long on the ground, 
'Ere he fearfully heard a sound, 

As of trampling hoofs retreating : 

And a dismal cry and a foot draw nigh ; 

" Stand ho !" 'twas an armed man passed by : 
But he spoke no sound of greeting, 
And seemed like a death-shade fleeting. 

in. 

O'er the lone mountains riding, 

He gallop'd by gloomsome ways, 
Where night-mists were abiding, 

Round the witch of evil days : 
Her name is written on the wind, 
That speaks in cliffs and caves confin'd. 

List there when the waning moon goes down, 

And thou 'It hear the call her spirits own ; 
But as they pass, hold a chrystal glass, 

Or thou 'It sorely rue the wild witch-tone. 



 

IV. 

O'er the lone mountains riding, 

From a distant land he came, 
No step his dark step guiding ; 

But he thought he saw a flame, 

That bright, or dim, would sport awhile ; 

Then vanish, as in very guile ; 
He heard, as he passed, the witch-name sound ; 
And his startled steed, at a single bound, 
Bore him away from that evil ground. 



But o'er the mountains pacing 

As fast as he can flee, 
Strange steps his steps are tracing, 

And a shape he cannot see ; 
And, though he flee away, so prest, 
Whether to north, or south or west, 

Toward the past, or coming day, 

(So dim the night he may not say) 
Still oft by fits did ghastly gleam, 
A corpse-light, all unknown to him. 



He followed the light o'er deserts wide, 

Down in deep glens, where wild becks wail : 



 

He followed by darkened forest side ; 

He followed with dread, though link'd in mail ; 
Till it stayed before an iron gate, 
Where battled turrets kept their state, 

O'er towers so high and massy strong, 

They seemed to giant-king belong. 



Sir Adomar looked him all around : 
Turret on turret hung on high, 
Shaping black lines on the dim sky ; 

Sir Adomar looked him all around ; 
Nought, save this castle, could he spy, 

Though, heavily clanged a death-bell's sound ; 
And in each pause of the shuddering blast, 
Moans were heard as of one from'neath the ground ! 

VIII. 

He struck on the gate with his good sword : 
" Ho ! wardour, ho !" but never a word 
Return'd the wardour from within. 

" The storm is loud, the night is dark, 

I hear from the woods the dog- wolf bark. 
Up, wardour, up ! it were a sin 

To turn a traveller from your tower, 

At such a lone and dreary hour ; 
A Saracen would let me in !" 

 







The wardour was watching through the loop, 
How many were of the stranger's troop. 
He had left his torch in the cullis' bar, 
And it let down a light on the lonely night. 

That showed him harnessed, as for war. 
His coat was mail, his helm was steel ; 
His visor did his look reveal ; 
Yet o'er his brow it cast a shade, 
That made the wardour more afraid, 
Than did the crimsoned plume above, 
Or the mighty grasp of his iron glove, 
He would not let the stranger in, 
Till one, awakened by the din — 
One whom the wardour need obey — 
Seeing a lonely knight stand there, 
Bade the wardour nought to fear : 
He feared still, but he said not Nay : 
Yet he would not ope the portal gate 
To an unknown knight, without his state ; 
For neither squire, nor page, he saw : 
He bade him then to the postern draw: 

x. 

The knight dismounted at the call ; 
The porter let him through the wall ; 



 

He turned the weary steed to stall, 

And led the knight to the lordly hall. 

P the lordly hall, so wide and dim, 

One drowsy squire awaited him. 

The ashy wood lay, white and cold, 

On the raised hearth, where late was told, 

With fiery eye and accent loud, 

The deed of martial prowess proud ; 

Where late was told, in whispers low, 

Some tale of terror and of woe, 

The while each listener bent his head, 

Xor lost a word the trouveur said : 

Till fear crept o'er each nerve and vein, 

That late had swell'd to martial strain ; 

And shadows crept along the wall, 

Such as the sinful soul appal : 

Till each, who heard, look'd round with dread, 

And saw some phantom of the dead. 

XI. 

Now silent was the hearth and lone, 
Save that a stag-hound slumber'd there. 
The tables in disorder were, 
With relics of the evening fare ; 

The household to their rest were gone, 



 

And now no light was seen but one, 
The light that led the stranger on ; 
That show'd above steel armour gleaming, 
And many a dusky banner streaming, 

From the black rafters of the roof, 

In the night- wind, far aloof, 
Like to some flitting phantom seeming ; 

And, stalking o'er the rushy floor, 

It showed the knight where steps of gore 
Had stain'd its green, with foot-prints red. 
And the stag-hound, as the knight passed by, 
Sent forth a mournful fearful cry. 



The drowsy squire the stranger led ; 
(The wardour to his post was sped.) 
They traversed the hall in silent march : 
At the end was a door in a mitred arch. 
The knight stood before that mitred door, 

And gazed on a warrior shape above, 
That seem'd to watch the passage o'er. 

In his altered look strange passions strove 
The armoured shape leaned on its sword, 

And downward bent its steely face, 

As jealous who below might pace, 
Or about to speak the challenge- word ; 





And it seemed the very form of one, 
The knight perforce must look upon. 



Thus, while he stood in wonder-trance, 
The squire upheld the torch on high, 
Viewing the guest with watchful eye ; 
And marvelling what strange mischance 
So check' d his step, and fix'd his glance : — 
" Sir knight, why gaze you on that steel ? 
It is a baron's good and bold ; 
Had he been here, no welcome cold 
Would he have shown a stranger-knight, 
Who trusted to his towers at night." 

xiv. 
The spell of fant'sie loos'd awhile, 
The knight return' d a grateful smile, 
With thanks for this so courteous style; 
And, then with thoughtful accent said, 

While yet he stood, that shape before, 
" The armour some resemblance had 

To that of a dear friend no more ! 
A friend !" — he paus'd, — " a friend long dead !' 
This, while he said, his colour fled. 
The squire seem'd not to note his pain, 
But, with fair speech, began again 



 

Excuse to make for slender fare, 

That it was night, and, not aware 

Of honour' d guest approaching there, 

The menials to their rest had gone ; 

A chamber should be fitted soon. 

His squire and page should welcomed be ; 

Right well he longed that squire to see. 

xv. 

The wearied knight a gesture made, 

And looked his thanks, but nothing said ; 

Save that, for rest alone he prayed. 

He sighed, as through that guarded arch, 

And vaulted gloom, he held his march ; 

And there, before his doubting sight, 

Glided again a pale sad light, 

Full often he had seen with fear, 

Yet more he felt to meet it here. 

Then came they to an iron door, 

And the knight beheld that flame no more. 

It opened to a second hall, 

Where warriors frowned upon the wall ; 

And ladies smiled in portraiture, 

With downcast eye and look demure. 

An umbered flash the red torch threw, 

Athwart each warrior's steadfast brow ; 



 

And hardly might the gleam declare 
A baron grim from lady fair. 



There is no need that I should tell, 

What hasty fare the stranger took ; 

Nor how the squire, with silent look, 
Watched, wondering, what had him befell ; 
So strangely gleamed his hollow eyes, 

From forth the lifted beaver's shade 
So wan his lips, like one that dies, 

So few the words and thanks he paid ! 

XVII. 

Though round the hall his looks would steal, 
Not well did torch or lamp reveal 
The portraiture of warriors grim, 
Or noble dames hung there so dim ; 
Their frowns and smiles were lost to him. 
But once, when that he turned his head 
Where the fix'd torch a gleaming shed, 
A sable form, ill seen at most, 
Went gliding up a stair, on high, 
Passed through an open gallery, 
And through a door-way there was lost, 
That seemed to lead to antient rooms, 
Such as where silence dwells, and glooms. 



 

The knight, he felt a sudden chill, 

Though nought he said of what had sped ; 
But the spicy draught he deeply quaff'd, 

Whenever the page his cup did fill. 

And from his spirits chaced the ill. 

XVIII. 

The night-cheer o'er, the page led on 

The stranger to his resting-place. 
He led the way, that form had gone : 

On the high stair he stood a space, 

Waiting the knight's reluctant pace, 
Then, with mute reverence, marshalled him 
Through many a gallery, long and dim, 
Where helmets watched, in order grim ; 
Through many a chamber, wide and lorn, 
Where wint'ry damps had half withdrawn 
The storied paintings on the wall. 
Electra, o'er her brother's urn, 
There bent the head, and seemed to mourn ; 
There, too, as meet in room and hall, 
Troy's tale and Hector's piteous fall : 
Here Priam's Court, in purple and pall, 

 The " Tale of Troy" appears to have been a very favourite subject in ancient tapestry. It occurs often in old 
castles, and is mentioned twice in this " Trew Chronicle," 
as adorning the walls of stately chambers. 





Its golden splendour now had lost ; 

But Helen, on the rampart stood, 
And pointed to the Grecian host, 

Out-stretching to the briny flood. 
Here Hector's wife sat in her bower, 
Waiting her lord's returning hour ; 
And 'broidering 'midst her maiden train, 
While her infant played with silken skein. 
There — but it boots not that I say, 
What stories once, in long array, 
Lived on those walls, now ghastly clay. 

XIX. 

The knight would oft, as he strode by, 
Cast on their shade a searching eye ; 
And pause, as list'ning some drear sound, 
That rose within the glimmering bound : 
And start, as though some fearful sight 
Passed along this gloom of night ; 
But, at a lesser winding stair, 
(The long drawn chambers ended there,) 
When to that narrow stair he drew, 
He thought a robe of mourning hue 
Went fleeting up that winding way ; 
No glimpse had he of shape or ray ; 
No foot he heard the stair ascend. 



 

Yet still that seeming garment passed, 
As though some fiend, with evil haste, 
Did up that lonely tower wend. 



The knight, he stood on the step below — 
" Whither, my young page, dost thou go ? 

Who dwells within this lonely tower, 
Passing with speed, in sable weed — 

Passing with speed, at this dead hour ?" 
 ' Nobody, save the raven-crow, 

Dwells within this lonely tower ; 

And here, Sir knight, is your resting-bower !' 
" But in this tower I may not rest, 
Till I know who that stair has pressed ; 
Did you not see that black weed wave?" 

" Yes, knight, I saw the raven's wing, 

Glint up that wall with sudden spring : 
And hark ! you now may hear him crave !" 



" It is not courteous, that my bower 
Should be within this ruin'd tower !" 
" But see, knight, 'tis not in decay ; 
The storm hath blown a bar away, 
And the raven through the loop doth stray 
His nest is wet on the battlement grey : 



 

Your chamber is a stately room, 

Hung round with work of choicest loom ; 

And erst it was the resting-place 

Of our dear Lady Baroness, 

Before she went to stranger-land. 

My lord yet strays on foreign strand. 

The chamber has another stair, 

Leading to many chambers fair ; 

But no step goes by night so far, 

Since my lord baron went to war." 

XXII. 

The page stept on with torch before, 

Far as that stately chamber's door. 

" Page ! lift that light — fain would I know, 

Whither that second flight doth go?" 

u It goes to a battlement up on high, 

And to a turret perching by." 

" Doth none keep watch on that turret high ?" 

" None, but the raven with his cry ! 

Your rest, Sir knight, he will not break ; 

To traitors only doth he speak. 

They say he scents the new spilt blood." 

Upon the stair the raven stood ! 

He turn'd his dark eye on the knight, 

And, screaming, upward winged his flight. 

The wondering page looked back with fright, 



 

And met the stranger's fiery glance ; 
Then, hardly daring to advance, 
Lingered he at that chamber-door ; 
" On' said the knight,  with torch before !' 
Scarce was the page the threshhold o'er, 
When check he made, and pale he turn'd ; 
Dim and more dim the torch-flame burn'd. 
The knight look'd on, but nothing saw, 
That might explain this sudden awe. 



A spacious chamber there was spread, 
And, for his rest, a stately bed ; 
Fresh rushes on the floor were strewn ; 
Faint on the arras'd walls were shown 
The heroes of some antient story, 
Now faded, like their mortal glory. 
Another form, as dark as doom, 
Stood within that chamber's gloom, 

Unseen by those who entered there. 
His cause of dread the page thus said : 

" Methought I saw, within that chair, 
The baron's self, my very lord ; 
I saw it, on a true man's word : 
I saw my lord return' d from far, 
Arrayed, as he went forth to war ! 





He fixed his very eyes on me, 

But looked not, as he wont to look. 
Yet now no living shape I see, 
And know that here he could not be ; 

For, long since, he these walls forsook : 
Yet is it strange such visions pale, 
Should o'er my waking sight prevail." 

XXIV. 

" Whose are these antient walls, I pray ?" 

The sullen stranger 'gan to say : 

" Sir, know you not these towers and halls 

Watch where the foaming Conway falls ? 

Who should these walls and towers own ? 

And the wide woods and forest round, 

Even to Snowdon's utmost bound, 

Save the brave lord of Eglamore ?" 

The knight explained his ignorance, 

He was a wanderer late from France. 

The page surveyed him o'er again ; 

He thought the wily knight did feign : 

A deadly hue was on his cheek ; 

His looks spoke more than words may speak. 

Yet to the page, though much it told, 

He read not all it might unfold. 



 



The knight perceived his doubting thought, 

And drew a badge forth from his breast ; 

Some noble Order's golden crest, 

Upon a field of silver wrought. 

" This badge' he said, " with blood was bought. 

He turn'd with haughty frown away. 

The page did not more doubt betray ; 

But service offered to undo 

His casque and linked harness true ; 

But the stranger gravely said him Nay, 

And refused that night to disarray. 

XXVI. 

Wondering, yet fearing to demand, 
Why to these towers from distant land, 
The knight had come, without his train, 
Pondered the youth his doubts again ; 
Again, as though his thoughts he read, 
The knight look'd sternly down and said, 
" My squire and my foot-page I missed 
At night-fall, when the woods betwixt. 
But they perchance may shelter find, 
From this bitter-blowing wind, 
In the deep hollow of some hill, 
Till the dawn break, and the storm be still." 



 

XXVII. 

" But the wolf bays in the blast afar ; 
Sir knight, how may they scape such war ? 
I hear him now — he nearer howls ! 
Mercy ! mercy ! save their souls !" 
" Hark !" said the knight, and stood aghast ; 
It was no wolf-howl in the blast ; 
It was a blood-hound's dreadful bay, 
The stranger heard, with such dismay — 
The blood-hound at the tower below ; 
That over pathless hill and dale, 
Had tracked a murderer in the gale, 
And came to claim his master's foe. 
While listening to the lengthen'd yell, 
The stranger seemed to hear his knell. 
" A blood-hound loose, and at this hour ! 
Your rest, sir knight, had ill been kept ; 
Nor one within these gates had slept, 
Had I been in my distant tower." 
The page he lighted a lamp on high ; 
The stranger stifled scarce a sigh, 
That heavily for utterance pressed. 
He heard the page's steps descend, 
And go where the long chambers bend, 
Down to the halls, and th' outer walls. 



 

The page knew not the chance he ran ; 

He was marked with the blood of a murder'd man ! 



The knight, he listened in silent dread, 

Till now, the blood-hound's voice was stilled 
But soon a low voice near him sped, 

That every nerve with horror thrilled. 
He looked the way that lone voice came, 
And saw, by the lamp's tall spiring flame, 
A portraiture on the wall beneath, 
Of noble dame, that seemed to breathe. 
Robed in sable weeds was she : 

The gleam fell on that lady's brow ; 
There, written dimly, you might see, 

The characters of hopeless woe. 

XXIX. 

Soon as that lady's face he saw, 

All other dread his heart forsook ; 
He gazed with fixt and frenzied awe, 

And vainly tried away to look : 
For to his fearful sight it seemed, 

As though her eyes on his were bent ; 
And, where the pale flame wavering gleamed, 

As if her varying cheek were blent 



 

With lights and shades of death ; 
While round her lips a grim smile drew, 
And the rose paled that on them blew ; 

And, with faint lingering breath, 
" Prepare' she said, " thy hour is nigh ! 
Unpitying, thou hast seen me die ; 
Unpitied be thy mortal sigh !" 

XXX. 

He heard the words — the words alone ; 
He heard not that deep solemn groan ; 
He heard not the clang of the 'larum bell, 
Xor from the gates that horn -blast swell ; 
Xor heard the many-trampling hoofs, 

Xor voices calling in the gale, 
And ringing round the castle roofs, 

Till they made the 'battled raven quail ; 
Xor heard the funeral shriek, that broke 
Through every hall and lofty tower ; 
He heard alone the words she spoke. 

XXXI. 

Xor saw he in the court below, 
Bv the torches' umbered glow, 
Borne upon his bleeding bier, 

With wounds unclosed and open eyes, 
A warrior stretched in death draw near ; 

Nor heard the loud and louder cries, 
 





This piteous sight of horror drew 
From every friend and vassal true. 
But he knew that voice at his chamber-door. 
And straight the witch-veil of glamour 
Falls, and his wonder-trance is o'er. 
He hears his summons in that sound ; 
It is the bark of the true blood-hound. 
True to his murdered lord is he ; 
He has traced the steps he could not seeTraced them o'er darkened miles and miles., 
O'er glen and mountain, wood and moor, 
Through all their swift and winding wiles. 
Till he stopped before his master's door, 
And bayed the murderer in his bower. 

XXXII. 

The castle gates were strait unbarred, 

And he sprang before his bleeding lord ; 

He passed the page unheeded by, 

And tracked the stranger's steps on high ; 

Till at the door, that closed him in, 

Loud and dread became his din. 

The doors are burst, and the spectre-light 

Betrayeth the form of the blood-tracked knight 

He was armed all over in coat of mail, 

But nothing did steel that night avail ; 

He fell a torn corpse, beside that chair, 

Whereunto the page did late appear, 



 

By the dark glarnour-art revealed. 
His murdered lord with lance and shield. 
The murderer fell, and his death- wound found 
In the terrible fangs of the true blood-hound. 



Here the voice of the minstrel ceased ; 
and, after striking a few notes of his harp, 
full and deep, he rested with a look of 
sorrow. His eyes dwelt on the Lad}Barbara — but she heeded him not ; but 
sat with head inclined, as if still listening 
to his dismal tale. There followed a dread 
silence in the room, as of expectation of 
that which was to follow. Some there 
were, who said the ditty was already 
ended; yet they would fain have heard 
something of the pitiful history of that unhappy lady, whose portraiture was in the 
tower-chamber, and would have known 
what was the guilty motive of the knight 
against the Lord of Eglamore ; and how 
it chanced he came so unwittingly to his 





castle. Others there were then present, 
who, having noticed the young Gaston 
de Blondeville to he ill at ease, the 
while the minstrel sung, and being, perchance, already moved by the merchant's 
strange accusation, scrupled not to think 
the story touched him nearly ; and that 
Pierre rested, not because his ditty was 
at an end, or from weariness ; but that 
he doubted whether it would be well to 
proceed to the second part. 

However this may be, he needed not 
have stayed his strain, for Sir Gaston was 
no longer in the chamber. Whether 
Pierre knew this or not, he began once 
more to strike upon the harp ; when, on 
a sudden, the king's trumpets were heard 
blowing up near the stair ; and anon, his 
Highness entered the bower, it being almost time that he should go to his rest 
for " all-night." 

There was no more harping : Pierre 




tuning not up his second fit ; and belike, 
if his Highness had been there at first, 
he would have bidden him to shorten 
his ballad by one-half. 

The King looked about for Sir Gaston ; 
and, espying him not, asked wherefore he 
was not there ; but, before any answer 
could be given, the knight had returned, 
and now approached his Highness. He 
was then commanded to dance a round 
with the Lady Barbara, and he obeyed ; 
but many there noted the sadness on his 
brow, though his steps were light and 

gay. 

A more pleasureful sight could not be 
than the Queen's bower, as it was at that 
time, where she sat in estate, under a 
cloth of gold, her ladies standing about 
her chair, and her maidens on either hand, 
below the steps of her throne; and two 
young damsels of surpassing beauty and 
richly bedight, sitting on the first step, at 




her feet ; the same, that were used so to 
sit, when her Highness kept state in the 
great hall at festivals. 

Behind them, half encircling the throne, 
stood twenty household esquires, holding 
great wax torches, right richly beseen in 
the king's livery, and proud to wear it, 
gentils as they were, as I said before, and 
of ancient families in the countries from 
whence they came. 

The arched roof was curiously wrought 
in that fashion, which King Henry had 
newly brought into favour ; and, besides 
these lights, a great crystal lamp, that 
hung from the roof, shone over the chamber and upon the goodly assemblage, as 
they looked upon the Lady Barbara, 
passing so winningly in the dance, That 
night, the Earl of Richmond bore the 
Queen's spice-plate, and Sir Philip de Kinton her cup. 

When the Lady Barbara had ended 



 

her dance, the Queen called her to her 
chair ; and, making her take of the sweetmeats from her own plate, spoke commendable words to her, as did his Highness King Henry. Then the Queen, turning to the Lady Gloucester, took from her 
hands a girdle, richly beset with jewels, 
and, clasping it on the Lady Barbara, 
kissed her, and bade her wear it ever, for 
her sake and for her honour. Her Highness then stretched out her hand to Sir 
Gaston, who, kneeling, put it to his lips. 
" May you, Sir knight," said her Highness, "as well deserve this lady, as she 
deserves this token of my regard !" 

Then, the King said many gracious 
things, and seemed so merry of heart, 
that he made all around him gladsome ; 
till, the Voide being ended, he went forth 
with the Queen, the trumpets blowing 
before them ; and the chamber was then 
speedily avoided for all night. 



 

While these things were passing in the 
chambers of estate, there were divers 
wassailings and merriments making in 
other places of the castle. In the great 
hall were feasting and revelling, but not 
of estate. There were tumblers and jugglers and morrice-dancers and mimicks 
and mummers, with pipings and blowings, 
that made the roofs ring. 

The monks at the priory heard them 
afar, while at the last even-song, and long 
after ; and well I wote, that had it not 
been the King's castle, there had been 
some rebuke, as indeed due, for such 
noise made. The Prior in his chamber 
sat alone ; listening, I guess, in gloomy 
mood to the revelry ; and, all that night, 
only Edmund the monk and mass Peter 
with him : he came not forth to midnight-song. 

But now I must return, and so must 
ye that hear, or read, to the castle. In 



 

the hall there was a dancer on stilts, playing the while on a recorder ; there were 
dancers on one leg, and dancers upon the 
head ; but that which most rejoiced many 
of the beholders, were the disguisings and 
the quaint antics of the mummers. There 
came a whole troop, some wearing the 
heads of asses, some of bulls, some of 
calves, some of cats, who brayed and 
kicked, bellowed and tossed, scratched 
and mewed, to the very life. Others, 
like stags and hares, hounds and apes, 
kept not so pertinently to their pretended 
natures, but marched on with solemn 
state, as much as might be, hand in hand, 
as if they had . been loving friends and 
neighbours ; yet each with a dagger stuck 
in his girdle. And others again, with 
fools' girdles and bells hanging to them ; 
tossing their heads, and cutting sucli 
strange capers, to the noise of pipes and 
drums, as made the sides of many to 
 

shake with laughter, and roused up every 
hawk on perch there to shake his bells 
in concert. 

But all this was child's play, though it 
was often done before the worshipfullest 
estates, in comparison of the sayer's art ; 
which, when he could be heard between 
whiles, when the loud revelry paused and 
held breath, was marvellous to hear : and, 
as soon as those mad-heads caught the 
words of that tale-teller, sooth to say, 
they soon were still and hushed, as though 
no living soul but he breathed there ; listening to his dismal tradey, with tears in 
their eyes, or quaking for fear of the 
strange things he told them. He, the 
while, with solemn visage, showing as 
though he himself believed all the marvels he related, and not showing roguish 
smiles, as some do, kept on always to the 
far end of his long tale : though some 
learned clerks would oft-times comment 



 

to their neighbours upon his marvels, as 
if he had purported lofty matter worth 
their notice, and did not merely strive 
to while an idle tide away. 

In other parts of the castle were those 
gentils and honest gentlewomen, that, misliking the loud revelry of the hall, drew 
together in chambers apart ; and delighted 
themselves with histories of times past, 
the sad hopes of lovers, or the deeds of 
brave knights, or otherwise in singing and 
harping, after their own manner. 

In the lower hall too was feasting, 
and the mirth did not stop short of the 
" Kuchane," so that every man to the lowest degree was joyous ; and each chamber 
and tower rung with song, or laughter, 
save the prison tower of the poor merchant. He, as he lay on his pallet-bed, 
heard those sounds of music and jollity, 
in confused uproar rising through the 
courts, while his heart was stricken with 



 

fear and sadness ; for, whether he were 
right or not in believing Sir Gaston to be 
the murderer of his friend, it is certain, 
that he had seen his friend murdered, and 
that too, as he had said, in the woods of 
Ardenn. 

He was, at this time, far from his home 
and friends, and had been travelling, over 
these parts, a lonesome stranger, along 
the foss-way from Lincoln, southward ; 
having been on his merchandize into the 
north seas, and having landed on the 
eastern coast. Coming again to that place, 
where, a few years back, he had buried 
his friend, the remembrance of him broke 
out in fresh grief; and, hearing that the 
king was coming to keep festival in Kenilworth, he resolved to break the matter 
to him ; as well as to adventure to tell him, 
the times were such it was no longer safe 
to journey in any part of his kingdom. 

The most audacious robberies, certes, 



 

were then committed at noon-day with 
impunity ; nay, the very thieves themselves feared not to be seen walking about, 
little attempt being made to seize them, 
or, in any wise, to suppress these scandalous outrages. Not only then did the 
sad fall of his friend, but also the fearful 
condition of the living, urge the merchant 
to make the truth known to the king. 

With this design he had rested at 
Kenil worth, but not at the house where 
he had formerly suffered such affliction ; 
and, on the king's arrival, had gone forth 
in the crowd to behold him, though he 
had not intended to present his petition 
in that time of turmoil. But, when he 
saw near his Highness, riding as it were 
in the top of favour, the very man, whom 
he thought to be the slayer of his kinsman ; when he beheld that look, which 
he felt to dart into his heart, and to revive there all the horror he had felt at the 



 



 



aspect of the murderer, at the moment 
when his friend had been stricken down — 
then it was, that, overcome by the strength 
of his feelings, he dropped down senseless 
in the castle court, as hath been related. 

And now, what had he gained by his 
courageous demand of justice ? Suspicion, 
contempt, fear, grief, a prison, and, perhaps, death. Yet did he not repent the 
effort he had made, so honest was his 
grief for the fate of his kinsman ; so much 
was his mind possessed with the notion, 
that he had accused his very murderer; 
so confident was he that he was performing a duty ; and, what is more, so sure 
was he, that to perform his duty in this 
world is the wisest, the most truly cunning thing a man can contrive to do. 
Whether his suspicions concerning the 
knight were just or not ; these, his conclusions touching his own conduct, none 



 

but fools, or villains, that is, none but 
fools — will deny. 

Thus he lay on his pallet, alike deprived 
of sleep by the jollity of others and by his 
own grievous reflections. A lamp burned 
beside him, but it served only to show the 
forlornness of his condition, in this high 
and distant tower. Sometimes, he would 
rise and look through his grated window 
upon the inner court of the castle, listening there awhile to the distant minstrelsy and to the confusion of numberless voices, footsteps and closing doors, 
that rose from many a chamber below. 
Anon, a torch-bearer would pass the court, 
a page, perhaps, or a yeoman ; and would 
show the gloomy towers above and the 
steps of the guest he led at their feet. 
But, this passed, nothing could the prisoner see, save here and there, a lamp 
burning through a casement of glass (and 



 

a goodly show there was of such windows 
now in this castle) like stars through a 
clouded sky ; but mostly the glorious 
beams of the great hall, that struck 
through the windows and lighted the air 
above. Once he heard the trumpets blow, 
and thought the King was coming forth, 
and once he fancied he saw, in the person 
of one who followed a torch-bearer, Sir 
Gaston himself. Then turned he from the 
casement, looked no more, and fell upon 
his pallet. 

At last, every distant sound grew fainter ; the noise of the dancers ceased ; then 
the minstrelsy sunk low ; the voices of the 
hall revellers became few ; he heard less 
frequently the doors opened and shut ; 
and then he heard the fastening of bolts 
and bars : and, afar off, the castle gates 
closed for the night ; and soon all grew 
still, as though no living creature inhabited 
there. 



 

And thus it kept, until the wayte piped 
his second watch in all the courts. Then 
the stranger arose, and, looking again 
through his grate, saw him well, by the 
light his groom carried, piping the hour. 
And, when the man had finished his saye, 
he went round the court, his boy-groom 
holding up the torch, while he tried every 
door, and found that all was safe. By 
this light too, he perceived the wardour's 
men on guard; but no living being else 
was seen. The windows of the great hall 
were dark ; and, the torch being gone, nothing glimmered through the night, save 
one great star, which wizards say is evil. 
It stayed, at his hour, right over King 
Henry's lodgings ; but for whom it watched, who was there that might tell ? The 
prisoner knew the star, and all that was 
thought of it, and he betook him to his 
pallet groaning heavily. 

He had not long been there, when, as 



 

he thought, a voice near him spoke his 
name. Now, there was a small grate 
looked out from his chamber upon the 
stair ; and thence the voice seemed to 
come. The prisoner, raising himself from 
his pallet, turned, and saw there the figure 
of a man passing away. He kept his eyes 
fixed, for some space, upon the grate, but 
the figure appeared no more, and he sunk 
again on his pallet. 

The voice, faint and passing as it was, 
had thrilled him with dread. Whose it 
was, wherefore it had called him by a name 
known but to few, and had then passed 
away, without communing with him, he 
tried in vain to understand ; yet seemed it 
not wholly new to him. 

END of vol. I. 



THE THIRD DAY. 

Here was a drawing of the inside of the great 
hall, with the King and Queen holding festival. In 
the back-ground was a sketch, of what seemed to be 
a pageant acted there ; and yet the spectators appeared to be looking on, with an interest too serious 
for so trifling a performance. In the margin, also, 
was drawn, the chapel before mentioned, with a 
marriage ceremony at the porch. 


 
THIRD DAY. 



On the morrow, the Prior of Saint 
Mary's was with the King, before the 
esquire-barber had clipped his dread Highnesses beard, or the rushes had been 
strewed on the chapel-floor for the bridal 
company, or even the ox-chine, the manchets and the pitchers of wine had been 
delivered out from the kuchane and the 
buttery-hatch, for the breakfasts of the 
King and Queen and their lords and 
ladies. He told his Highness, that no 
person of the name of Reginald de FolB S 





ville was on the burial lists of the Priory ; nor was there any inhabitant of that 
house, or of Kenilworth, yet discovered, 
who remembered that name, connected 
with the extraordinary circumstances that 
had been related. It was, however, notorious, that robberies had frequently been 
committed in the woods and chases of 
Kenilworth, where many close and dark 
thickets were the home of outlaws ; and 
that no single person, and few small companies, could travel in safety through any 
part of the forest of Ardenn. He remarked, that, if the merchant had suffered there the outrage he had alleged, it 
was extraordinary he should now venture 
to travel over the same ground without 
guide, or companion, to lessen his danger : 
for, it had appeared from himself, that he 
was travelling without either. 

It was no less extraordinary, that, if 
the calamitous adventure, related by the 





merchant, had occurred so near to Kenilworth, and so few years back, it should 
not be generally known and still remembered there. From all these circumstances, and particularly from that of the 
name of Reginald de Folville not being 
found in the cemetery-book of the Priory, and from the absence of every other 
memorial of such a person, save in the 
charge itself, the Prior scrupled not to 
insist, that the stranger, now in confinement, was an impostor, falsely calling himself a merchant ; who, for his own private 
ends, sought the ruin and the life of Sir 
Gaston de Blondeville. 

His Highness seemed well satisfied that 
it should be so ; and, in his indignation 
against the accuser, declared, that his life 
should be forfeited, for the crime of having 
sought another's. He called for Sir Gaston ; and, having acquainted him with 
the result of the Prior's inquiries, assured 





him, that his honour should be cleared 
from suspicion, and his accuser openly 
condemned : and his Highness told him, 
that, since he would soon be unable to 
serve him as a knight of his household, 
such being batchelors only, as well as that 
all the world might have proof of his spotless honour, he would place hhn amongst 
the nobles of his land. 

So saying, his Highness bade him to his 
intended bride, and to hail her Baroness 
of Blondeville ; also to warn her to be 
ready for the appointed ceremony of her 
marriage, by then two hours were past : 
and forthwith his Highness departed the 
chamber. 

The Earl, her father, when he heard 
of what had passed, in the presence of the 
King, and of the new dignity conferred 
on Sir Gaston, was well contented to receive the young Baron for his son ; but the 
lady, her mother, whose tenderness, being 
more than her ambition, made her fearful 


 



of contrary tidings, was not yet completely assumed, that this would be a 
happy union for her child. The Lady 
Barbara herself, however, nothing doubting the worth of her suitor, loved him not 
the less for having been accused, nor the 
better for having been raised to new dignity ; nevertheless, she took the distinction 
in good part, rejoicing, that it should thus 
appear he had not fallen in the esteem of 
his Highness, the King. 

She was now in her bower, already 
attired for the bridal, attended by her six 
maidens, the daughters of some of the first 
nobles of the realm. And, although this 
be not a gay history, chronicling the vanities of women, yet will we here report 
all that we heard of this lady, in so far 
as her appearance may tell what might 
be seen in the King's court, at this time. 
She wore on her hair a string of pearls of 
great value and a necklace of the same, 
given her by the young Baron. Her robe, 





white as the lawn of the Archbishop, was 
confined by the precious girdle, given to 
lier by the Queen ; and over all she wore 
the veil of a sister, and pity it was, that 
so fair a vestal should be relinquished to 
this world, instead of being retained in 
the community, which had once looked to 
have her their own. But I say not now 
more of her appearance, at this time. 

King Henry, during his visits to Kenilworth, had newly repaired and adorned 
the chapel of the castle, and there the 
marriage was to be solemnized. By his 
command, the walls had been painted with 
the story of King Edward, the Confessor, 
giving the ring off his finger to a poor 
stranger. The floor was strewed with 
rushes and oak leaves, and with such 
sweet flowers as the season afforded, from 
the woods and the gardens. The lights 
were all a-blaze, so that they overcame the 
perpetual tomb lights of Geoffrey de Clin> 





ton, the founder of the castle, interred in 
the chapel here. 

When the trumpets had sounded, there 
went forth in procession, first, the Queen 
and her court, her ladies pacing before her, 
two and two, according to their rank, preceded by her minstrels and the officers of 
her household. Next before her Highness went the bride, her six maidens strewing flowers before her, and Maria, the famous French poetess, who was then at 
the Queen's court, playing on her harp. 
Amongst the ladies encompassing her 
Highness, were the Countesses of Cornwall and Pembroke, (the latter then become Countess of Montfort) and the lady 
mother of the bride. 

When these nobles and gentils had been 
met at the gates of the precinct of the 
priory, by a part of the choir, and by two 
of the secular clergy, and had been led to 

 





the porch of the chapel, they were more 
fully received beneath it by others of the 
clergy, repeating what is appointed to be 
there said ; and were led into the chapel 
by those, who had received them, and so 
were they placed, every one according to 
their rank, unless when the Queen made 
any especial choice. Then, the King's 
trumpets blew up, and his Highness approached, accompanied of Prince Edward 
and the Earl of Cornwall, and attended 
by the knights of his Highness's body, the 
knights of his household, and a countless 
train of nobles — the young Baron conspicuous among them all, for that graceful and gallant air, for which those of his 
nation were renowned. The cloud, that 
was over him yesterday, had passed, and 
his countenance was joyous as the day. 

And next to this young lord in grace, 
and high above in dignity, was the Archbishop himself : of lofty stature and of 





venerable and commanding aspect, he 
passed with slow and stately steps, preceded by bishops and others of the church, 
his pm-ple train borne up by two pages, 
and his own virger making due place for 
him and his part of the procession. Meanwhile, those of the clergy and of the choir, 
who had received the Queen, had returned 
to the precinct-gate, whence, with due sentences, uttered before the whole company, 
but 'specially before the bridegroom, they 
led him to the porch, where the banns 
were fully proclaimed. 

I hold it not meet to speak here, with 
greater pourtrayment, of the more solemn 
ceremonies in the chapel itself, only that, 
when the Archbishop came to the lowest 
step, he stayed there some time, with 
bended head in silence, the bishops having 
passed to their places ; and then the minstrels and the children of the chapel began 
an anthem, which ended not till the Arch




bishop, the King, the bride and bridegroom, had advanced to their proper 
places, and, the bride's veil having been 
thrown back, the Archbishop, on the special command of the King, began to read 
what is appointed. 

There was that day in the chapel, 
among the crowd, by some unknown hap, 
a stranger, who seemed to observe, with 
more attention than the greater part, all 
that passed, yet did he never ask a question, nor speak to any one there. He was 
seen in different parts, although the press 
of people was so great, it was difficult for 
any one to change his station. At last, 
having reached the sepulchre of Geoffrey 
de Clinton, he leaned among the tomb-lights 
there, and moved no more. There was 
in his countenance a touching solemnity, 
while he watched the progress of the ceremony, which was noticed by many present ; for, in his whole demeanour there 





was something, though it was difficult to 
explain what, that drew away the attention of many from the sight they came 
to witness, and that was pity, for it was 
such a sight as is seldom seen. 

King Henry, of goodly stature and of 
comely countenance, was in a robe of dark 
blue velvet ; and with the dignity of his 
carriage there was mixed an air of good 
humour, that made all men feel at ease in 
his presence. His son, Prince Edward, it 
was remarked, had a sterner look than 
had his father. Many, who knew, that 
the King's heart was good, in many respects, lamented his weaknesses,, and that 
his passions too often carried him away.» 
He now appeared in his state and well 
able to enjoy it ; but the Archbishop, 
with his firm, composed, and solemn countenance and lofty figure, made all other 
dignity appear as nothing. He was like 
some oak of our forest , whose grey top has 





braved the storms of centuries, and whose 
mighty branches still afford shelter to the 
storm-beset traveller, and to the plants 
and flowers at his feet. The Lady Barbara was the lily there ; the Baron de 
Blondeville, a young beech, growing at 
hand, with all its glossy branches and 
light foliage, spreading forth in graceful 
beauty. What pity, if the lightning should 
sere those green leaves, and destroy its 
promise ! 

When the Archbishop asked, who gave 
away the maiden, his Highness advancing, 
graciously delivered her to the Baron, who 
bending one knee, received her of the 
King ; but, as he rose up, his countenance 
showed not joy, or love — it showed consternation. His eyes had glanced on the 
tomb of Geoffrey de Clinton, and were now 
rivetted, where the stranger stood. The 
stranger, as he still leaned amidst the 
torches there, seemed, however, unmoved 





by the dismayed looks of the bridegroom ; 
his gloomy sternness was unshaken. But 
the emotion of the Baron increased: his 
looks became deadly pale, and he could no 
longer repeat the words, that were necessary in the ceremony. AU eyes were soon 
directed upon him, and then upon the 
Lady Barbara, who fell into a swoon, and 
would have sunk on the ground, had not 
the King's arm sustained her. Her maidens, and some of the Queen's ladies hastened to her assistance ; but, though almost every one in the chapel looked upon 
her with pity and care, the Baron regarded her not, nor seemed to know what 
had happened to her. His attention was 
still fixed upon the tomb, whither, too, 
directed by his looks, all other eyes now 
turned; but they perceived only the extended marble image of the dead one 
within, and the torches burning round it. 
The stranger was no longer there. The 





hasty surprise of the King, the calm displeasure of the archbishop, the severe curiosity of the youug Prince Edward, the 
distress of the lady mother, and the wonder of all, where this might end, may not 
be told. 

His Highness, inquiring of those about 
hi«i whence this confusion had arisen, was 
answered, there was a stranger in the 
chapel, who seemed to be known only to 
the Baron, and it was surely the sight of 
him, which had occasioned this disorder. 
Then, the King commanded, that the 
doors should be shut, and search made for 
this unknown person, whom he suspected 
to be some secret colleague of the young 
Baron's accuser, come hither purposely to 
interrupt the ceremony ; and he commanded also, that the service should proceed, as soon as the parties atfected should 
recover their presence of mind. Many 
there thought the King too hasty in this, 





and the Archbishop himself testified no 
willingness to proceed. 

The Baron did not long remain in his 
apparent torpor, but, on his recovery, he 
seemed like one awakened from a dream : 
he looked round with fear and surprise ; 
and, fixing his eyes again on the tomb, he 
was well nigh relapsing, though nothing 
there was seen, save the marble image 
and the torch -lights around it. The King 
spoke graciously to him, and, when the 
baron heard his voice, he made most 
humble gesture before his Highness, and 
craved his pardon for the disturbance he 
had created. 

" You must ask pardon of this lady," 
said the King, showing to him the bride, 
who was now nearly reviving ; " for it is 
she only who has suffered." 

Then, the young Baron seemed, for the 
first time, to know fully what had happened, and he hung over her with sadness 





and anxiety ; yet divers of the courtiers 
thought he felt more for himself than for 
her, and of this number were those, who 
envied him the new honour he had attained. 

When the bride had recovered, her 
lady-mother would have withdrawn her 
from the chapel, and she herself wished to 
go away from the great observance that 
had been drawn towards her; but the 
Baron, addressing himself to the King, 
besought his Highness to interfere on his 
behalf, and not to suffer, that the vain 
impulse of a momentary and wandering 
feeling, which had, at times, come over 
him even from his childhood, should be 
taken in so serious a part. The Baron 
having knelt to the King, as he said this 
(and once before he did the same, but I 
did not note it on these leaves) the 
Archbishop could ill conceal his just displeasure, that the Baron should do re




verence in that place to any human being ; and the King said the Archbishop 
was right ; and, making the Baron instantly rise, asked what had caused his 
dismay, and whom he had seen, that 
should have caused it. 

Then the Baron answered, that he had 
seen one like unto his dead father; but 
he now knew it to have been only an apparition, suggested in his own mind ; and 
he repeated, that to such like delusions 
he had been subject from his young-hood. 

This was not said so lowly, as that the 
lady Huntingdon heard it not ; and she 
thought, that such a state of mind was a 
sufficient reason for withholding her d?:Ughter from the marriage : and the Earl, her 
father, taking up the objection, had begun 
to repeat it, — but he was soon silenced ; 
for his Highness said, peremptorily, that, 
because of consent duly given, he had resolved to be present at the marriage, with 





his court ; and it were not to be allowed, 
that a momentary infirmity of one of the 
parties, who instantly afterwards desired 
to have the ceremony renewed, should be 
sufficient for rendering all the preparations, which had been so great and so 
public, bootless. And his Highness commanded progress forthwith. 

Yet the Archbishop had some private 
discourse with the King; and it seemed 
as though he were recommending delay, 
at least till that stranger had been questioned, whose appearance, he privately believed, had thus disturbed the Baron de 
Blondeville, notwithstanding the tale he 
had told. The lady Barbara herself was 
questioned, as to the cause of the distress 
she had betrayed ; but she answered only, 
that it was the sudden alteration in the 
Baron, that caused her spirits to fail. 

When those, who had been ordered to 
search the chapel, were called upon, they 





declared, that no where could they find 
the stranger who had been seen, neither 
within the doors, nor in court, nor in 
chamber. Then, the King, without further delay, commanded, that the service 
should proceed ; and it did proceed accordingly, and was concluded, without farther let, or hinderance. 

So the King and Queen returned from 
the chapel to the great chamber, in due 
state and order, and the court dispersed 
for that day, until the evening, when there 
was to be a grand banquet, to honour 
these nuptials. 

All that day, the young Baroness seemed grave and thoughtful ; the lady, her mother, was not a whit more joyed ; although 
the Earl, recollecting the honour the King 
had newly conferred on the bridegroom, 
and beholding, in his mind, other benefits 
likely to follow, seemed now again to be 
well contented with this marriage. But the 
Baron carried himself thoughtfully, for one 





in his circumstances ; and some, who observed him closely, thought there was still 
a tale to be told, which he liked not to 
have known ; and others, who envied him 
less his new title, held that this humour 
was but the remains of that, which had 
seized upon him in the chapel, and that 
it was the recollection of this and of the 
confusion he had there occasioned, which 
preyed upon his spirits. However this 
might be, he seemed desirous of shaking 
off that mood, and to appear at the banquet with the gaiety, which the time 
invited. 

Surely the preparations for this feast 
were magnificent, though they came not 
nigh what had been made on some former 
marriages, such as that given at Westminster, when Richard, the King's brother, 
wedded Cincia, daughter of the Count de 
Provence, and sister to the Queen, when 
three thousand dishes were served up 





at the wedding dinner ; nor is it to be 
thought this was like unto that one afterwards at York, when King Henry gave his 
daughter Margaret in mariiage to Alexander, the young King of Scotland ; and 
my Lord Archbishop gave, for his share of 
the feast, sixty pasture oxen, which were 
clean consumed at that entertainment ; 
but, nevertheless, this at Kenilworth was 
a right noble and princely banquet ; and 
thus it was. 

The King, that night, with the Queen, 
kept state in the great haU, which was 
thereunto, by command of his Highness, 
hanged about with that suit of tapestry, 
which setteth forth the story of our famous 
King Richard, Coeur de Lion, his deeds 
in Palestine ; and be it remembered, that 
King Henry loved nothing better than to see 
on his walls the noble achievements of his 
ancestors and others, as the Queen's chamber here at Kenilworth showeth, where he 





had caused to be pictured forth, MerKn, 
King of Britain, and his three sons ; the 
sailing of WilHam from Normandy ; the 
submission of Griffin ap Conan to Henry 
the First, and several other things. 

This tapestry in the great hall was 
placed on all sides under the windows, 
down to the floor, except at the bottom 
of the hall, where the great gallery ran ; 
and there the carved screens beneath were 
sufficient to hide the buttery-hatch, on the 
other side of the passage, and the doors 
leading down to the kuchanes. It hung on 
all sides, save here, and where the great 
chimney stood, which was guarded by a 
projecting stone-work, of curious carving, 
and like unto a canopy, or open porch. 
The wood, that was consumed within, was 
laid this night on andirons of solid silver, 
bossed. 

On the top of this seeming porch, stood 
figures of armed knights, as large as life. 





such as were in the gallery before-mentioned. That gallery was covered with 
weapons and with complete suits of armour ; some, with helmet and feet fastened 
against the waU, and others standing upright, like to living warriors, armed at all 
points ; but doubtless, these last were well 
held up by some artful contrivance. Five 
figures, thus appointed, stood in the front 
of the gallery, as if watching who should 
enter from the screens beneath. Amongst 
these was one shape of black steel, larger 
than the rest and higher by the head; 
said to have been the very harness worn 
by the Eang's great uncle, Richard the 
Lion, in some battle in Palestine : and 
the very sight of it was enough to daunt 
with fear those unused to a field of war. 

Certes, it was like to that worn by this 
king in the very tapestry, wherewith the 
hall was this night, in good part, adorned; and where he was shown fighting 

 





in all his glory. It has been said, the 
young prince was much moved at the 
sight of the daring deeds there pictured 
forth, and of that armour — but not with 
terror, rather with noble pride, to emulate 
such greatness ; and that he was by this 
and such like things, often before his eyes, 
prompted to what he afterwards achieved ; 
but of this I cannot say. The keys of this 
gallery of arms were kept in the care of 
the lord constable of the castle, so that no 
person might enter it, without his special 
leave. 

In the back wall was a window, opening 
from the King's chamber, that looked over 
the gallery into the hall below ; and where 
his Highness used sometimes to divert 
himself, with observing what was passing 
at the different tables there and with the 
games and sports, passing amongst his 
household and followers. He needed only 
to draw aside a curtain in that chamber, 
to see all that was doing in the hall be




low ; and there, at even- tide, he might 
remain unseen, if it so pleased him ; for 
the gallery received light only from the 
lamps in the arches high above. 

Not the minstrel's gallery was this ; 
never was it so at Kenilworth ; nor in any 
great hall of prince or peer where state 
was duly kept. Their gallery was on the 
left, opposite to the great chimney, and 
nearer to the dais, where they sat all joyfully clothed in the King's livery. 

At the upper end of the hall, raised by 
several steps above the rest of the flooring, was that dais, where stood the high 
tables. The King was under a canopy of 
crimson velvet, fringed about with gold ; 
the Queen's was on the same platform, 
and with a canopy of the like form and 
stuff; but the canopy was lower by the 
valance. 

A carpet of crimson silk was spread 
under the tables, and down the steps of 
the dais ; below this, the floor of the 
 





hall was strewed with fresh rushes, on 
which were laid wood-flowers in plenty. 
In the bay-windows, at the end of the 
platform, or dais, a princely cupboard was 
set forth, stage above stage, of nine or 
ten heights, till they reached the bottom 
of the glass casements there ; piled up 
with gold and silver cups and dishes and 
with basins of soHd gold, some set with 
precious stones, and others highly wrought. 
From the arched roof of these two 
bays hung lamps, that showed all their 
brightness, and illuminated the roial 
window above, and also the slender columns, that reached to the roof; and the 
curious fret-work of leaves and flowers 
spreading there ; which had been newly 
done by command of King Henry, who 
loved such vanities, and had brought this 
new fashion out of Normandy. He had 
put such roial windows, perchance better 
painted, in his new church at Salisbury. 





Those, who now beheld the pomp he 
displayed and his vast retinue, wherever 
he kept his court, might say, with the venerable monk of St. Albans, on occasion 
of the marriage of the Scottish King Alexander with this King Henry's daughter ; 
" If I were to describe the grandeur of 
this festival, the number of the noble guests, 
the splendor and various changes of their 
dresses, the abundance of the tables and 
the variety of the sports provided ; those, 
who were absent, would think I was inventing." There, Matthew, the good 
monk, tells us yet more of the Archbishop 
of York on that occasion, who expended 
four thousand marks in entertaining the 
courts of both kings and in every kind 
of munificence to the poor and sick. The 
two kings, Matthew further tells us, entertained by turns their whole courts, " so 
that," as he adds, " the theatrical vanity 
of this world might show to all, as much 





as it could of its short and transitory 
gladness." And vanity it was, as those of 
Saint Albans knew to their cost and sorely complained of, when the King went so 
often to the Abbey there. 

But what would such have said, had they 
lived now, in our King Richard's days ; 
who, the second of his name, is first in 
every kind of new extravagance, the like 
of which was never seen afore, and what 
it may end in, there is no one that dare 
yet say. 

But now, to go back to the past King 
Henry ; he proved himself, according to 
the account in the Norman tongue, which 
I have seen, not only an excellent " meatgiver" here at Kenilworth, but a sumptuous bestower of many pleasures and a 
patron of every kind of mimickry, such 
as painting, carving, music and versifying, 
as this hall at Kenilworth fully displayed, 
on this very night. Before the feast began 

 

it was a goodly sight to behold the Serjeants at arms and the ushers, bearing the 
piles of gold and silver cups and the spiceplates to the boards ; and the ceremony of 
laying forth the sur-nap on the King's 
table, in readiness for him to wash, which 
was thus : — 

The King's sewer having laid the end of 
the sur-nap and a towel on the board, and 
the usher having fastened his wand to them, 
drew them to the other end of the table ; 
and then kneeUng down, the sewer at the 
other end kneeling likewise, they stretched 
the sur-nap smooth. Then the usher, 
laying up the end of the towel on the 
board, rose and did reverence before the 
King's chair, with his wand, as though his 
Highness had already been there. And, 
when he had kneeled down and amended 
the towel, he did reverence again in like 
manner. 

On either side of the hall, reaching from 





the steps of the dais (for in this hall was onlyone dais) to the screens at the end, were ranges of tables, appointed for different ranks 
and degrees of the Court: and it were goodly to see these nobles and gentils ranged in 
their places by the marshal of the hall. At 
one table, on the right, next below the dais, 
were those of the King's blood, who sat not 
at his board. Opposite, on the other line, 
sat the noble dames, all together. 

Next below the King's board, sat the 
bishops and the abbots, each at their 
own table ; then, the King's high officers of 
estate, such as attended not on his person ; 
there were, besides, the four Barons of the 
Exchequer, assessors, and several other 
great servants of his courts of justice, which 
always followed him, wherever he might 
choose to keep the high festivals of the year, 
and to administer the laws of the realm. 

Other tables were set apart for other 
ranks of nobles, not of blood; their 





wives and daughters sitting apart from 
them. Thus every table was filled, each 
with its respective rank, magnificently attired ; the nobles in velvet and cloth of 
gold, the dames sparkling with jewels and 
bearing plumes on their hair ; the bishops 
in their 'broidered copes and golden mitres, 
and the great officers of state in their own 
peculiar habits, with their golden chains. 

But the table of the knights-banneret 
was that which made all, save the ladies' 
boards, look pale and dull. They wore 
their 'broidered mantles over a kind of 
light cuirass, each with a sash of crimson 
beneath, thrown over the shoulder and falling down to the sword. On their heads 
they had each a small cap of velvet, with 
a gallant plume of feathers depending on 
each side, which it was the King's pleasure 
they should wear, even in his presence. 
On the wall above, were the shield and 
helmet of each knight, their banners 
 





waving over them. At the bottom of the 
hall was the esquu-es' table, were sat nineteen of them, an-ayed in the King's livery. 
Every table had its own officers of service 
as marshal-sewer, conveyers, almoner and 
butler, appointed according to the rank of 
the guests. 

Now, the trumpets without having given warning, the King and Queen entered by a door leading from the statechambers ; attended by the young Prince 
Edward, the Archbishop, the Earl and 
Countess of Cornwall, the Lady Pembroke 
and Montfort, the Earl and Countess of 
Huntingdon, the bride and bridegroom, all 
the knights of the household then at the 
court, arrayed in their velvet gowns, the 
esquires of the body; the kings at arms, 
heralds and pursuivants, going before in 
their coats, — two Serjeants at arms appearing to make way. Next before the King, 





went the lord marshal of the hall and his 
eight knights. 

Thus, their Highnesses came in, with a 
brave noise of trumpets, and took their 
seats at the high tables. And immediately 
entei'ed from the door, forty yeomen, each 
bearing a torch, who took their stations 
down the middle of the hall, between 
the tables, in two lines. Ten esquires of 
the household, most richly bedight in the 
King's livery, who had marched before his 
Highness, with the four esquires of the 
body, stood in a half-circle ; each bearing 
a large wax-light, at the back of the dais, 
near the high tables : — while other ten, 
with lights, took their stations, in two 
divisions, at the foot of the steps of the 
dais ; but leaving an open space, that all 
the guests might have sight of the princely 
board.  

There, clusters of lights in golden 





candlesticks, showed the massive plate 
and the marvellous devices of the banquet, 
with the magnificent attire of those who 
graced it ; and these lights, together with 
the numerous torches below, and the lamps 
depending from the points of every inverted pinnacle of the roof on high, cast 
such a blaze of splendour, not only on the 
banquet beneath, but on every painted window above, as made the hall as grand 
Q. spectacle, well nigh, for those without, 
as for those within ; only that the guests 
could not be seen, by reason that the windows were so high above them. 

Some travellers that night, coming from 
afar, through the woods, espying the 
blaze, wondered what it might mean. And 
some poor pilgrims, travelling from the 
shrine of Saint Hugh, at Lincoln, seeingthrough the darkness such painted light 
afar off in the valley, took it for some 
delusion, raised by evil wizards for their 





destruction ; and they ventured not forward, till they had, after due observation, some assurance of the mortal reality. 
Presently, as they advanced, they distinguished better the gorgeous colouring of 
the windows, which they knew to be of 
the new manner, called roial, and then the 
towers above, though these were pale in 
the moonlight, and then they heard the 
revel sound of minstrelsy within ; and 
so, coming to the priory-gate, they asked 
shelter and had it : for, though they were 
told, that the King kept his court, and, 
at that time, banqueted in the castle, they 
chose to take refuge in the quiet of our 
cloister, rather than to ask for any part, or 
sight, of such doings. But, to come back 
to the King's feast, of which much and 
marvellous is yet to be told. 

At the King's table sat, on his right 
hand, the Archbishop of York; beyond 
him sat the young Prince Edward ; and, 





on the left, the Earl of Cornwall. But, 
just before his Highness came to his place 
and sat, the Archbishop, as highest of 
estate, delivered unto him the napkin ; 
and the young Baron, for his honour, was 
allowed, on that night, to bear the golden 
basin and ewer for the King to wash ; 
although there were so many of higher 
estate in the hall. At the same time, was 
brought another golden basin to the Archbishop, who seemed to wait till the King 
should have washed : but his Highness 
made a beck, that he should wash ; and he 
did so. When the King washed, straight 
five esquires gathered round him, and 
stood with their lights, till he had made 
an end. 

This ceremony done, they withdrew to 
their places, and the Baron took his behind 
the King's chair, who spoke merrily to him, 
while he served ; and the Baron had recovered his good looks, and wore his gown 





of azure, broidered with silver, with as 
good a grace as any one in court. He 
was, most certain, of a brave figure, and 
of countenance, that, for high spirit, seemed to challenge comparison with every 
man he looked upon, which made him 
many secret enemies. 

At the Queen's board, sat the Countesses 
of Cornwall and Montfort, and the young 
Baroness de Blondeville, and none other. 
A golden ewer, set thick with rubies, stood 
beside her Highness ; and a basin of the 
same, with damask-water, strewed with 
fresh pulled lavender, was held to her to 
wash by one of her maidens, who duly 
sat at her feet under the board, the young 
Baroness beanng the napkin. Which done, 
two of her Highness's maidens, who waited 
behind her chair, delivered them to the 
Queen's pages. 

And now entered the hall, Nonoy, King 
of anus, heralds and poui'suivants attend




ing, all in their coats ; the lord marshal, 
with his eight knights, and the steward, 
treasurer, and comptroller, walking before 
the first dish for the King s board ; which 
was carried by the King's chief sewer, wearing his neck towel ; his carver,Harpingham, 
wearing the same, surrounded by esquires, 
of the household bearing wax-lights, and 
followed by Serjeants at arms and esquires 
and pages. But, when these had reached 
the middle of the hall, they all stood still, 
and made reverence to the King ; the lord 
steward, with his wand ; the carver with 
his great knife, and the sewer with his 
dish in his hand : and again, at the foot of 
the dais, they all stopped short, and bowed 
before him, the trumpets sounding the 
while. 

Would you know what this first dish 
was ? It was a warner of shields of boar, 
in armour, with mustard, served with 
malmsey. When the warner was ended. 





the first course, and so was every other, 
was brought up by seven sewers, with like 
state and with due taking of assaye of 
the King's meat, and with divers other 
ceremonies too tedious to relate. 

Only amongst the dishes were frumentie, 
with venison ; frumentie roial, with a dragon for a suttletie ; browst of Almayne, 
potage of gourdis, and felettes in galentine. 

At the Queen's table, amongst many 
other dishes and suttleties of curious invention, were these — tench in jelly ; great 
custard planted for a suttletie; petynel, 
peronsew with his segue ; goos in hochepot 
and browet tuskay. 

There was, also, for an honour to the 
young Baroness, a special suttletie, presenting the Queen's bower, with her ladies 
ranged round, and the lady Barbara, re-, 
ceiving on her knee the jewels, which her 
Highness had given to her the night before ; there too, was presented Pierre, the 





minstrel, playing on his very harp. The 
Baron de Blonde ville had leave from the 
King to quit his chair, for a time, to visit 
the bride ; and, when he showed this suttletie to her, she smiled ; but it was the 
first time she had smiled this night. 

There was another suttletie of archers in 
the forest hunting the hart, with foresters 
in green blowing their horns and the whole 
court following. In this, too, was the Lady 
Barbara mounted on a milk-white palfry, 
her hair bound up in a beauteous net ; but 
not of gold and pearls, as it was this night, 
nor wore she a mantle of white cloth 
like that she now had on. At a distance, 
within the shadow of the trees, stood an 
aged man alone, wringing his hands ; but 
what this might mean none knew. 

In the hall below, every table was abundantly served with dainties, according to 
the rank of those who sat there ; and all 
were contented, as well they might be. 





The King talked graciously and often 
to the Baron de Blondeville, and sometimes would send him with a dish of dainties from his own board to the Baroness ; 
nothing doubting, that he would like tlte 
errand. And, when the Earl of Norfolk 
brought his Highness his cup, he drank to 
her ; but the trumpets blew up too soon, 
so that what he said was heard not ; but 
he bowed, and thrice waved to her his 
hand, the which, soon as the young Baroness saw, she rose up and curtsied low 
three times, to the great pleasure of all, 
who beheld her sweet grace and modesty. 
Many there were in the hall, who cried 
out, " May she be happy !" 

The King had given back the cup into 
the hands of the Lord Norfolk, and was 
resting him in his chair.; when he saw 
the curtain drawn back of that window, 
which opened from his own chamber upon 
the gallery of arms, and a person standing 





there. While his Highness marvelled by 
what means any one could have admittance into that chamber, the keys being 
in the custody of the Lord Constable, the 
window was unfolded, and the person, advancing into the gallery, came forward to 
the front ; and there stood still, and with 
great seeming confidence, beside the armour of Richard the Lion. 

Although the light, that fell there from 
the roof, was not so strong that his Highness, at such distance, could distinguish 
the countenance of this person, yet, by 
the grey gleam reflected there, he seemed 
to be clothed in steel, with helmet on his 
head : and so like was he to the form of 
King Richard, that, had not his Highness 
seen him advance, and the real shape of 
motionless armour standing by, he would 
have thought this but a figure for show, 
like the others there. The King, no less 
surprized by the strangeness of this appear




ance, than displeased by the boldness 
which had thus openly defied his command, respecting that chamber, ordered 
an esquire to repair to the Lord Constable, 
who was himself in the hall ; and learn 
whom he had admitted there. The Baron, who stood by, looking whither the 
Kling looked, on a sudden changed countenance ; and his Highness again observed 
that stupor and dismay, which he had noticed in the morning, beginning to fix his 
eyes and to spread over every feature. 
The King spoke sharply to him, to rouse 
him, as was supposed, from his trance ; but 
without effect, for he stood fixed and stiffened, like to a marble statue, yet with 
looks bent on the gallery, where the stranger stood. 

Then, the King gave a beck that none 
should notice his condition ; hoping hemight recover himself, before the Queen 
and the young Baroness should observe 





him. When the Archbishop perceived 
that person standing in the gallery, he 
was observed to make the holy sign ; and, 
when he looked at the Baron and saw his 
amazement, he repeated it : — it was said 
his Highness asked him why he did so ; 
but that he answered not, save by a look 
of solemn reverence and by bowing of 
the head. That stranger, though the King 
fixed his eyes on him with displeasure, 
moved not ; but his Highness, though 
unable to distinguish his features in that 
obscure situation, thought the intruder 
likely to be one not obscure, if known, 
but one who expected to remain unknown 
in a place so far from what was now passing ; and his Highness resolved, that he 
should not escape detection. 

With the esquire messenger, came up 
the hall the constable of the castle, to attend the King's pleasure. His Highness 
turned to chide him for not having better 





observed his command, respecting his own 
chamber; and enquired who the stranger 
was, that had intruded there. With astonishment, the constable declared the 
keys of that chamber and gallery had not 
been out of his keeping, and that he had 
not admitted any one thither. 

" Nay," said the King,  thine eyes 
may contradict thy tongue ; look there, 
and thou wilt see one less willing to keep 
council against thee than thyself." The 
constable looked to the gallery, but, perceiving only the known figures of armour 
there, he stood silent and amazed. Then 
his Highness, seeing the stranger was 
gone, said, "I let this pass. Thy friend 
has seen thee, and profited by the warning. Be more heedful in future. Go now 
to thy place." 

The constable did reverence, and departed, marvelling much at the King's 
words and well resolved to enquire fur




ther into this matter. And now the Baron, not having been spoken to for some 
space, began to recover himself, hke one 
awaking from sleep, and happily before 
those at the Queen's table knew what happened. The King made a sign, that none 
should speak, and then, accosting him with 
his wonted graciousness, bade him go to 
the table appointed for his rank, and refresh himself there. The young Prince 
Edward looked on him with curiosity, 
but without pity ; and spoke not to him. 
Meanwhile, the Baron gazed around with 
strange visage, as if he knew not well 
where he was, but in a short space bowed 
to the King, and withdrew. While this 
passed, the Archbishop was noted to look 
often towards the Queen's table ; but he 
said nought. 

The constable, the while, was making 
busy enquiry, who had been in the gallery 
of arms, but no one knew any thing of the 
matter ; so he went himself to examine 





the doors, the key in his hand. The 
outer door, that led to the King's chamber, was fast. He unlocked it, and, leaving a guard there, went forward with 
lights through the whole range to the gallery chamber, and there examined the window door, that opened towards the hall ; 
which also was fastened, as he had left it. 

Much marvelling, he went out into the 
gallery, and tried a door, at the end, that 
opened upon a stair, and found it not only 
locked, but bolted within, so that if any 
one had entered this way, he could not 
have gone out by the same. The constable had ordered the outer-door to be 
guarded, as I said, while search was made 
through the gallery and the whole range 
of rooms ; but this was to no purpose, 
not any thing living being found there. 
And now he began to think, that his 
Highness had tasted too often of the golden cup, and mistaken one of the armour
 





shapes in front of the gallery for a living 
knight, or other warUke person. However, he took care to make the doors secure, and forthwith he departed. 

And now, when the second course was 
on its way to the King's table, the steward 
entered the hall, and called out loudly 
three times, " Wassel ! wassel ! wassel !" 
and, incontinently, the cup-bearers went 
round to the different boards ; and all of 
the Court, standing up and leaning towards the high table, drank the King's 
health. Then, the verger of the minstrels 
giving them the beck, they all at once 
set up their pipyngs and blowings, with 
such a brave noise, that the castle might 
have been taken by storm, before those 
in the hall could have heard the thump 
of a single war-wolf. 

There were trumpets and clarions and 
citoUes and tabarets and makerers and 
fithols ; besides the King's five harpers. 





all beating, or blowing, or thrumming 
together. They were heard afar off in 
the woods ; and many an outlaw lay on 
watch that night, for those, who might 
be travelling from the castle homewards. 
The brethren of the priory liked not the 
noise, and the Prior, I guess, would have 
liked it as little, but that he was amongst 
those in the hall, sitting at the table of 
the abbots. The poor prisoner in the 
tower heard the revelry, and to him it 
was sad indeed. 

It were making a cook's book to tell 
what dainties there Avere at the second 
course : these must suffice, for this little 
history: — There were joly amber potage ; 
jiggots of venison, stopped with cloves ; 
lamprey, with galentine, marchpagne ; fritter-dolphin ; leche-florentine ; with divers 
suttleties of castles  and dragons and 
voyages at sea ; and cities in the King's 
dominions, beyond the seas ; and a full 

 





tournament, showing knights on horseback, riding their rounds, and ladies 
freshly appareUed, in the galleries, looking 
at them. At the King's board, was a suttletie presenting his court of justice such 
as it was ah-eady prepared in this castle, 
against the feast of Saint Michael. There 
was his Highness, sitting in judgment, 
and all his great officers, sitting round on 
the benches. 

At the Queen's table, was a suttletie 
with ballads, the which, as yet, I have 
not. It was of three stages : the first 
presented Sir Gaston, at some former 
time, mounted on a courser in a field of 
war, and this alluded to some valorous 
exploit performed in France ; the second 
stage showed him kneeling before the 
King, who laid his sword on him, and rewarded him with knighthood ; the third 
stage showed him in his Baron's robes, 
receiving from the King the hand of the 





lady Barbara. There might you see 
every particular of the ceremony, as it 
had appeared that morning to the very 
life. There, too, was the tomb of GeofFrv 
de Clinton ; but the stranger, which had 
appeared there, was not mimicked. — 
While the Baroness looked upon this, 
with most serious countenance, suddenly 
she fetched a deep sigh, and fell from 
her seat like one dead. The Queen's 
maids and the bride's maids thronged 
about her, but none could tell the cause 
of this her sudden discomfiture. Though 
some readily guessed it was a recollection 
of what had happened to the Baron, that 
morn ; others in the hall affirmed, that 
they had just heard a voice speak these 
words : " Three tokens of death !" 

But the lady Barbara herself, when 
she recovered, feigned her swooning was 
from the heat of the hall and the noise 
of the music; and, in trowth, this last 





was enough to make a stronger one 
than her to faint ; and how the Prior sat 
it, who used always to cry out upon loud 
doings at feasts, was the wonder of many : 
but, that night, he seemed as joyously 
given as any there ; yet held he himself 
with all proper ceremony, and remained 
always at the abbot's board, saying little, 
unless to those near to him. The lady 
Baroness, at the Queen's command, was 
led forth awhile for fresher air. 

There entered the hall, about this time, 
a jongleur, or glee-man, with harp in 
hand, clad in a cloak of grey, and took 
his seat at the lower end. His sandals 
were stained with marks of many a mile's 
travel ; and he sat awhile wearied and 
breathless. Those, who saw him, supposed 
that he had been to Warwick Castle, there 
to exercise his art, as so many others of 
his craft did ; that, having heard the lord 
of that domain was here, keeping festival 





at Kenilworth, and knowing a jongleur 
to be always welcome at such seasons, he 
had posted hither, with all speed, not 
waiting even to amend his guise. Yet, 
marvelled they how he had gained admittance, in plight so ill becoming a King's 
presence ; but there was that in his look 
and stature, that agreed as little with his 
apparelling, as that did with the King's 
high presence ; and which checked the 
questions they would have put to him. 
A page, seeing his weary look, offered 
him wine and meat ; but he, with gesture 
that spoke as much as words, refused the 
gift, but accepted the good will. 

And now, the second course and a 
third being ended, came the heralds into 
the hall ; and, with loud proclaimings, 
called out, three times, " Largesse for the 
King, the Queen, the Earl of Cornwall, 
and the Baron de Blondeville !" shaking, 
the while, their great cup on high. And 





first they cried it before the King, at the 
foot of the dais, next in the middle of 
the hall, and last at the lower end. And, 
in their officious zeal to exalt those, who 
yielded most to them, they made the Earl 
of Cornwall King of the Romans ; but 
this was yet to be, which well they wot, 
also how wishful their lord. King Henry, 
was to gain this dignity for his brother, 
and how much he had employed his power 
and treasure therefore. 

The King, as he heard that title given, 
fixed an eye of correction on him, that 
spoke it ; yet was he not displeased with 
him in his heart, and he sent one to command, that he should again cry " Largesse" 
for the Earl, and so remedy the mistake, 
which was straight done accordingly. 

And now the minstrels came down 
from their gallery, and sat altogether, at 
the board's end, at the bottom of the hall, 
eating of the feast and partaking of the 

 

largesse-cup ; there to remain, till the disguisings should enter. And it was a brave 
sight to see them all apparelled in the 
King's livery, guarded and laced with gold ; 
their virger, more glorious than the rest, 
still directing all their doings. They eyed 
the stranger glee-man askance, and asked 
him not to their board, wondering why he 
came thither, where was no need of him, 
as they thought, and viewing his apparel 
with contempt and himself with disdain, 
as treading upon the skirts of their greatness, he being no better than a wandering minstrel. He seemed to read their 
thoughts, and his proud looks did somewhat daunt them; yet did his rufiled spirit take refuge with his harp and gain 
strength from it ; for, he soon struck forth 
sounds so strong and clear, as rung up to 
the arched roof, and filled all the hall with 
sudden wonder. Maister Pierre himself 
could not exceed him in force and spirit, 
 





and amongst the whole five of the King's 
harpers was not one, who might not have 
bowed before him. Soon, the hum of busy 
tongues, that had often filled the hall with 
noise as of the murmuring tides, so that 
the whole band of minstrels might hardly 
at times be heard, (yet seemed not one 
tongue louder than another) — soon that 
hum was husht and still, — and the sound of 
that harp alone rose up out of the silence, 
and spread its sweetness over all the air. 
Every face was turned, with deep attention, one way, in search of the minstrel, 
and every head was hung aside. 

Observing this, he quickly changed his 
measure to one more wild and abrupt, and 
his eyes seemed to send forth sparks of 
fire, while he sang, with full and clear 
voice, parts of the famous lay of Richar-d 
Coeur de Lion, as 

" Him followed many an English knight," 

and other lines. Prince Edward, the while, 





seemed to lose not a word he sung. 

When he came to the words, 

" By the blood upon the grass 
Men might see where Richard was," 

the glee-man could not end them before 

the Prince, forgetting where he was, and, 

with fiery eyes, as if inspirited by them, 

stood like a conqueror on his field. The 

glee-man proceeded. 

As snow ligges on the mountains, 
Behelied" were hills and plains 
With hauberk bright and helm clear 
Of trompers and of tabourer ; 
To hear the noise it was wonder : 
As though the earth above and under 
Should fallen ; so fared the sound !" 

When the harper had ended, the King 
asked who played ; and, being told a wandeiing glee-man, drawn hither by the 
fame of the festival, his Highness ordered 
he should be taken care of and well supplied with banqueting. 

 Covered. 





And now, supper being ended, damaskwater was brought for the King and 
Queen and the Archbishop to wash with. 
After, the esquires of the household taking 
the royal boards, with aU their suttleties, 
and the yeomen making off with those 
below in the hall, the place was cleared 
for dancing and disguisings. Then the 
Bishops, though not my Lord of York, nor 
yet the Bishop confessor attendant on the 
King, held it time to depart ; the abbots 
also ; and, with due homage to his Highness, forthwith avoided; but not the 
Prior ; he remained in the hall. 

It was then, that the King's Highness 
sent his presents to the bride's-groom ; 
being a rich cup-board of plate, the chief 
wonder whereof was a great cup of solid 
gold, standing on an eagle's foot. On the 
cover rose the head of a bird, whose eyes 
were of emeralds, and with his stooping 
beak he held the ring, which was set 
with rubies, as though by pulling the 





ring he would lift up the lid ; his wings, 
half-folded, formed the two handles. Great 
store was set by the King upon the workmanship of this cup, he having himself 
ordered the device of the eagle, and, as 
some said, to show thereby how he would 
encourage the aspirings of the young Baron. Besides this, were six spice-plates 
and six great bowls of silver chased and 
two basins and ewers of the same. There 
were also six great silver pots for wine, 
with the leaves set with emeralds twining 
round them, the grapes being of purple 
amethyst so cunningly enwrought, you 
would have thought you could pluck 
them. Many other things there were of 
this cup-board, too tedious to relate. 

To the young Baroness, who was recovered, and had now returned to the hall, 
the Queen sent a set of golden baskets 
for sweetmeats and perfumes, wrought, 
as was said, by a Frenchman, and of so 





seemly a fashion, the like had never been 
seen before, but which made some to murmur, that her Highness liked only the 
workmanship of her own country. For 
this, the Baroness, led by her lord, advanced nearer to the Queen, and thanked 
her, with most sweet thanks ; and then he 
his-self paid homage to the King for his 
princely gift, as doubtless he should have 
done before, but, perchance, his bride detained him to uphold her in thanking the 
Queen, before so great a company. Having 
done this, he took his station by the chair, 
his Highness often turning to him, with 
merry speech, to drive away the gloom, 
that yet, at whiles, hung upon his brow. 

Presently, the tuning of many instruments without the hall was heard, and the 
sound of the bugle drawing nigh and 
nigher, till suddenly the skreens were 
drawn away, and there entered, at the 
bottom of the hall, a mountain moving on 





unseen wheels, piled up with green trees 
of every shade, which rose to a height of 
forty feet, or more, and spread itself on 
every side. On the steeps of this mountain, stags — for so they seemed — were 
bounding from rock to rock, and foresters 
in green, with their dogs, were hunting 
them to the sound of bugles, concealed 
amongst the woods. 

These were all lords and men of honour, 
in goodly disguisings, so that you would 
have taken them for foresters and bucks, 
as they climbed up and down certain steps 
of this mountain, at the risk of their 
necks, and all for sport, and to please the 
King's Highness by their agility. And a 
pleasureful sight, ywis, it was to see 
them all running together, lords and 
knights and hounds and men of honour, 
as who should be first in his Highness's 
favour. All acquitted themselves to the 
very top of excellence ; for, they had been 





well taught in the knowledge of hunting, 
which is now called " the mysterie of the 
forests." 

Amongst them was Sir William de Mowbray, who, being somewhat of the fattest, 
was often fain to stop, and blowed so hard, 
that, had but a hunter's horn been clapped 
to his mouth, it would have tuned up as 
high as the best of them. There was also 
the young Lord de Lomene, a foreign-man, 
as light as the flame of a waxen morter, 
and he, stepping falsely, rolled down the 
side of the mountain from stair to stair, 
till he settled on the floor of the hall, never 
the worse for his forced performance, where 
he was received with a chorus of laughter 
and plaudits fi'om the whole Court. 

But anon the sound of the other instruments was heard, and another pageant 
entered. This was a goodly disguising of 
ladies, to the number of twelve, aU freshly 
apparelled in silks of Italy, and shut up in 



a lantern. Around this lantern were windows covered with lawn ; and within, 
amongst these ladies and women of honom', were forty wax lights, so that they 
might be seen and known, through all their 
disguisings, by every one in the court. 
Thus, these ladies of the lantern came on 
sweetly singing, like unto a cage full of 
birds, and playing on lutes and dulcymers, 
claricords, claricimballs and such-like instruments, with so jDleasing noise, the like to 
it was never before heard, till they reached 
the upper end of the hall. There, ere they 
grounded, they were turned round, before 
the King and Queen, that all the goodly 
machine might be beholden. 

Then, the rehersed, disguised Lords 
and men of honour, descending from their 
mountain (the lantern standing aside), danced awhile together by themselves deliberately and seemlyly, playing, all the time, 
upon the recorders and regalls and tabors, 





in harmony with the music in the lantern, 
which might be called " light of love" ; 
and, at certain times, tuning up, with most 
brave noise, and singing " Hayle, comely 
King, the cause of all our mirth !" And, 
presently, these ladies and women of honour, making a beck, that they wished to 
be let out of their lantern, the lords and 
men of honour hastened to open the door 
and to let them out, and help them down, 
and then they all fell deliberately to dancing, and gravely disporting together, in a 
most seemly sort, full curiously, and with 
most wonderful countenance. The while, 
the mountain and the lantern vanished 
together out of the hall. 

When this pleasant company of estates 
and gentils had ended their sports, and 
had dispersed to their seats round the hall, 
there was a ceasing of the minstrels ; and, 
forthwith the voide entered, with the he




raids blowing up before it. Then came 
two score and more of lords and knights 
and men of honour, some bearing golden 
spice-plates, others bowls of silver gilt, 
others golden cups ; followed by esquires 
and pages, bearing great silver pots of 
wine, to fill up the rehersed cups, as often 
as they were empty. 

And now the King stood up, and spoke 
right cheerly to divers about him, who had 
not approached him before, and, amongst 
others, to the Prior of St. Mary's, he being 
still in the hall, although it was past midnight, and those of his house were rising 
to keep the first watch of matin. His 
Highness was yet speaking to him, when 
my Lord Archbishop, who stood deliberately on the King's right hand, was 
seen to make the holy sign. Those, who 
observed this, marvelled, and the King, 
gravely accosting him, asked why, tmce 





this night, he had made this sign. But 
the Archbishop, as before, answered not, 
save by a look of awe and reverence. 

The King, turning his eyes, saw, standing firmly at the foot of the dais, one, 
whom he took to be the same person he 
had already seen, this night, in the gallery 
of arms ; and this he judged, not by his 
face, for his Highness had not then distinguished it, nor could he now fully see it, 
shaded, as it was, by his visor ; but by his 
singular figure, arrayed in complete armour. It seemed, however, as if his melancholy eyes were fixed upon the King. 
He stood motionless, and spoke not to any 
near him, nor did those near seem to regard him. For a moment, his Highness's 
attention was ri vetted on the object before 
him. He then sent an esquire to learn 
who it was, that had come thus unusually 
accoutred for a festive hall ; but ere the 





messenger had left the King, the stranger 
had disappeared in the crowd. 

And now, while the King and the 
Archbishop seemed severally to be pondering their thoughts, a solemn air of 
music was heard, without the hall, and 
the approach of another pageant withdrew 
his Highness's attention, who enquired 
why this had not appeared before the 
voide, but finished by supposing, that it 
was some mysterie of the men of Coventry 
intended to surprise him. He, therefore, 
graciously took to his chair again, listening 
to the sad and sweet harmony that advanced, while he ruminated on the late extraordinary occurrences ; for, indeed, the 
quiet mournfulness of these sounds promoted the musing of melancholy thoughts. . 

At last, the pageant entered, and there 
appeared in the hall the presentation of a 
sea-shore, with high white cliffs, so cun




ningly mimicked, that it was the marvel 
of all, who beheld. There seemed the 
very waves, flushed with the setting sun 
and bickering in the light, as also breaking 
with gentle noise upon the strand ; and a 
ship riding at anchor near, with a little 
boat lying on the beach, as if waiting to 
carry some one away. Now, the absence 
of certain evil sprites from this pageant, 
would have been enough to convince his 
Highness, that this was no mysterie of the 
men of Coventry, without the beautiful 
deception of the scene here played forth, 
— and he marvelled. 

Then there came in, the music playing 
sadly, a knight and a lady, with two little 
children following. The knight took them 
up tenderly, and pointed to the ship, and 
kissed them. The while, the lady wept 
sorely, and hung upon the knight, who 
tried to comfort her, and, pointing to the 
ensign on his shield, which showed that he 





was prepared for the Holy Land, he knelt 
down, and raised his hands on high. She 
knelt beside him, and then the babes, lifting up their little hands, knelt too; the 
music, the while, playing solemnly and 
sweet. Then they rose up, and the knight 
again kissed the children, and held the 
lady to his heart. After which, mariners 
came in, and, launching the boat, the 
knight departed for the ship. But the 
lady stood weeping on that sea-shore, and 
motioning with her hand, till he reached 
the vessel, and it sailed away. 

But still she stood, while it vanished in 
that gloomsome mist, which now seemed 
to rise from the ocean, and to stain all 
that glonous west, where late the day had 
been. Then, seeing the bark no more, she 
turned away, and wept piteously, leading 
her little babes, and so she departed. 

Then the sea-shore was gone all at once 
out of the hall, and the music changing 





to warlike strains of trump and clarion, 
straight there appeared, as if by very 
magic itself, a field of battle, with knights 
and banners, on one side bearing the holy 
sign. Nor was there wanting St. George 
for England, the English lion, with many 
other true-hearted ensigns. On the other 
hand, were shown Saracens, with their 
crescents, glittering, as if the sun shone on 
them. At a distance, on the slopes  of 
the hills, lay tents, with palms and cedars 
overtopping them. Nearer, on the low 
sea-bank, was a city of Palestine, with 
walls and mighty gates and domes and 
pinnacles. Within that sea-bay, too, ships 
rode at anchor. The tide was bright as 
amber, save where a sultry mist seemed to 
sit on the horizon, as if brooding a coming 
storm. Nay, such was the cunning of th£ 
scene, that you might sometimes think 
you heard that muttering thunder, which 








growls by fits so sullenly from far, before a 
tempest. 

The King could not but marvel ; and 
seeing this pageant was so different from 
those mysteries he had beheld played heretofore by the men of Coventry, and from 
any pageant he had yet seen enacted by 
English joculator, he asked what jongleur 
from the east now played forth his art ; 
for the like of deception and device he 
had never seen before. His Highness 
then bethought him it might be that 
stranger glee-man, who had, this night, 
come into his hall, and he meditated a 
due reward for his invention and for his 
loyalty, which he doubted not would lead 
him to display here some noble exploit 
in Palestine of Richard the Lion, whose 
deeds he had in part already sung. 

" Who is there," said King Henry, 
" would not think that show were living 



truth ? The light is on the hill, as if the 
sun shone there." 

While he spoke, there rose from behind 
the hill a line of spears and crescents as 
of a vast army of Saracens coming down 
upon the Franks. As they came on, you 
might perceive their helms and brazen 
visors, till they spread down all the hill 
unto the tents of the Franks. Then might 
you faintly hear the clash of cymbals, the 
dread bray of Saracen-horns and, ever and 
anon, the thump of tabours. And now 
the fight began between the armies ; and 
King Henry joyed to see Prince Edward 
watching all that was here enacting; he 
seemed to have King Richard's heart in 
very trowth. 

When the fight began, which was 
fought as if for very life and soul, the 
Franks fought with bows, swords, spears, 
iron-maces and battle-axes ; the Saracens 
wdth spears and scymiters chiefly. Pre




sently was seen the knight, who had set 
sail in the ship, fighting hard with two 
Saracens. There were few in the hall, 
that night, who, when they saw him so 
hard driven, did not think of the poor 
lady and her little children, whom he 
had left behind, and wish him victory for 
their sakes, as well as for his holy cause. 
These Saracens wore frightful masks of 
brass, and laid about them with so great 
strength, that it seemed the knight must 
fall. He broke his spear, and then he 
fought with battle-axe, and was nigh 
being overthrown, when another knight 
attacked the Saracens ; and the first, having now but one enemy left, went off the 
field fighting with him manfully. 

And. so the battle held on, near to a besieged city ; the Saracens, who were in it, 
sending forth wild fyre, called fyre-grekys, 
most like in shape to dragons and other 
dreadful beasts. Those, who beheld this, 
 


wondered at the surpassing cunning of the 
jongleur, and began to think he was one 
of those from the East, who practised arts 
of delusion ; for, some such they were. 
There were even wooden towers set up, 
without the walls, by the Franks, that 
played their darts into the ramparts like 
unto hail. There were also mangenelles, 
which cast stones, and the famous mategriffon, invented by Richard the Lion ; 
yet still no where was he seen in this pageant, so it was guessed this showed not a 
liattle of his time, though it was fought 
where he had conquered. Presently, 
there came a pell-mell of Knights and 
Saracens, hand to hand, and, amongst 
them, that same knight, who had first appeared departing from his own land. He 
was again hard beset, but he brought 
down his nearest enemy to the ground, 
and the others then betook them elsewhere. He disarmed him, and held his 





wrested sword over his head. The foe 
begged his life, which the knight granted, 
but kept the sword, and with its aid, rescued a brother-knight from an enemy, and 
then departed. 

Soon, flames involved the city ; then 
thick clouds of smoke involved the whole 
in darkness ; the shouts and trumpets 
sunk faint and fainter, and then were 
heard no more, and that glorious sight 
was gone for ever, no one saw how ! Attention still pursued the sounds, and there 
was yet in the hall deep silence, when 
other notes than those of war began to 
breathe, notes of such sweet and lively 
joy, as thrilled the hearts of all, who heard 
them. 

As they drew nigher, there came into 
the hall that rehersed sea-shore, with that 
rehersed ship upon the waves, and you 
might discern the pilot at the helm, and 
the sea-boys in their places ; and straight 





that knight was landed. He kneeled, 
then with both hands held his shield on 
high, and looked up to the heavens ; then 
he kissed the strand, the music playing all 
the while so solemn and soft, that not only 
many fair eyes, but many manly ones too, 
shed tears. Then the knight rose up, and 
departed, and the scene disappeared. 

And now other sounds were heard, but 
of what instruments none knew. They 
were grave and sad, with sometimes 
dreary pauses, that made many to shake. 
Then a forest appeared, with gloomy 
woods, and no sunshine seen, save one 
gleam, which showed travellers coming on, 
as if to some towers, the tops of which 
were seen over the woods ; and many 
in the hall said these looked like the 
towers of Kenilworth ; others said they 
were different. It was now, when the 
light was failing on these towers, that a 
torch carried by one of the travellers be



gan to cast its gleam beneath the boughs, 
and showed them to be three horsemen 
well appointed, one of whom appeared to 
be the very knight from Palestine ; who 
the others were none knew ; but the King 
viewed them with close attention, and 
with seeming displeasure ; and now not 
one word was spoken in the hall, and 
every eye was watching what would befall next. 

Anon there came out from the wood 
three men armed, and with masks upon 
theu' faces, who soon came up with the 
travellers and attacked them. These defended themselves as well as they could ; 
but the knight being armed, it was he 
who fought well nigh for all. Now many 
stood up in the hall, and a miu-mur and 
confused noise ran through it, for they 
guessed in their hearts what this meant. 

The Knight had his helmet on, but the 
visor was open, and thus was his face ex




posed ; on his helmet stood a raven for his 
crest, with open beak and wings halfspread. He fought manfully with the 
stoutest of the robbers, whose mask falling down to the ground, it was too plain, 
that his countenance was the likeness of 
one then living in the hall and standing 
by the King's chair. On this, every one in 
the hall, not excepting t?ie Ladies, stood 
up, some looking eagerly to the high board, 
and others to the pageant, while his Highness spake not, but sat as if sternly determined to watch this extraordinary delusion 
to the end ; nor did he once look towards 
any one, who stood near him. 

The end soon came; for the robber, 
wresting in a great struggle a sword from 
the Knight, plunged it through his open 
visor, and he fell from his horse, a dead 
man. Then was there a universal groan 
throughout the hall. The robber departed, 
with the sword in his hand, and darkness 





fell over the whole scene, which appeared 
no more. 

Now, the King rose impatiently from his 
chair, with looks of anger, and was about 
to inquire who had invented this deception, 
when he perceived before him again, standing on the steps of the dais, that very 
figure, clad in arms, which had before appeared there ; and he knew it for the likeness of that murdered Knight, whose fate 
he had just witnessed. There stood the 
raven on his helm, and there too, within 
its shade, appeared a countenance of deadly paleness, shrunk and fixed somewhat 
angrily upon the King. His Highness, for 
a while, stood petrified and with eyes amazed, as if he saw something that might 
not, with any endeavour, be understood ; he 
seemed to strive for speech, and at last 
faintly uttered, " Who art thou, and what 
is thy errand ?' 

Then, the Knight, pointing with his 




 

sword to the Baron de BJondeville, who 
stood, trance-bound, beside the King's 
chair, his eyes glared, and a terrible frown 
came over his face. The Archbishop made 
the holy sign, as he had already done, 
this night before, when the King had 
seen nothing strange near him ; and then 
stood with arms extended on high. 

The figure still pointed with his sword 
to the Baron. Again, the King vainly demanded of the stranger, who he was ? 
and, receiving no answer, gave order that 
he should be seized. 

Then it was, that the Prior of St. Mary's, 
having approached the King, suddenly 
stepped forward to arrest the stranger ; 
though such service pertained not much 
to him ; but he might have spared his 
pains ; for, where he would have seized 
upon the stranger, he eluded his grasp, 
and stood afar off in the hall ; and the 
Prior, struck with dismay, attempted not to 





pursue him. Then, his Highness, in great 
disorder, commanded, that all the doors 
should be shut, that he, who practised 
this delusion on the sight, might be discovered. 

And forthwith, his Highness was obeyed; but the stranger glee-man, who was 
the person suspected, was no longer to be 
found. A murmur went in the hall, that 
he was an Arabian jongleur — for, wondrous 
arts and deceptions those from the East 
were known to practise ; and he was 
sought for without the hall, in many parts 
of the castle ; but no where could he be 
seen, or heard of ; nor could IMaister 
Henry, the versifier, be found in the hall, 
whom the King called for, thinking he 
might know something of this jongleur, 
or how that strange mysterie, which had 
been shown forth, was brought about. 
Hearing this, the King was much moved ; 
and commanding that the search should 





be continued, he left the hall by a private 
passage, leading to his own chambers, followed by the Queen and her ladies ; the 
young Baroness being among them, who 
went off to her Highness's bower. 

The King, attended, by his especial 
order, only of the Archbishop, the Bishop 
confessor, the Prior of St. Mary's and the 
Baron de Blondeville, withdrew to his 
privy-chamber. When there, and the door 
closed, the Baron fell on his knee, and besought his Highness not to deliver him 
over unto the malice and envy of his 
enemies, who had invented this device to 
work his ruin. His Highness answered, 
the devices of his enemies should cause 
their own ruin, and that soon. 

Now came to the chamber, Maister 
Henry amazed and trembling ; for he was 
one, who rejoiced so much in good fortune, 
that he could bear other as ill as any 
man : and the King's frown was now 





upon him. His Highness asked, whether 
he knew aught of the jongleur, who had 
been that night in the hall, or of the 
mysterie, that had been there enacted ; 
for, in his heart, the King suspected, that 
Henry knew something of the matter. 

Maister Henry, confounded by the King's 
angry looks, knew not well what he answered ; which confirming the suspicions 
against him, his Highness hastily said, 
that if it should be found he had assisted 
in devising that delusion, which being an 
insult to the Baron, whom he favoured, 
was one also to himself, he should sorely 
repent his misconduct ; nor should he go 
entirely free, if he had obtained an entrance into the hall for that jongleur ; and 
forthwith his Highness commanded him to 
depart to his chamber, there to remain, 
till called forth by his order. 

Now it was that Maister Henry better 
found his speech, and it was to protest 



 

his innocence of that device ; and his ignorance, touching the jongleur, who had 
that night appeared in the hail, there to 
practise the glamour-art ; but this availed 
him little in the present mood of his Highness, till he entreated, that the master of 
the revels and the marshal of the hall 
should be called into his presence, and 
questioned, as to what they knew of the 
conducting of that pageant. The King 
consented, and they were called accordingly ; the marshal being still busy in the 
hall, helping there to the finding out of 
the stranger, but in vain. This he now 
made known to the King, and scrupled 
not to say, he beheved the whole to be 
the work of magic, worked by that jongleur and by the prisoner then in a tower 
of this castle. 

The master of the revels said the same, 
for that he had no hand in that mysterie ; 
nor had he seen any preparations made 





for it ; nor did any one in the hall know 
in what way it had entered. Then he 
took his Highness to witness, how it was 
possible, so marvellous a pageant, showing 
so many changes, and such a multitude 
of people, could have been completed, 
without long pains and trouble ; and therefore, how it could have been effected, unless by the glamour-art ; but no preparation for this had been seen by any ; nor 
knew he or any one how the different 
changes had entered the hall. The jongleur 
had sitten there the while, playing on his 
harp, but he had drawn from it sounds 
of many different instruments, that sometimes had seemed close where he sat ; 
and at others far off in the hall ; the 
music, that had been heard there, was 
not of the King's minstrels ! 

On this, the Prior of St. Mary's came 
forward, and, having craved leave to 
speak, which was granted, told the King 





he doubted not, that the whole deception 
had been wrought by the King's enemies, 
with certain spells of magic, such as were 
sometimes resorted to, in desperate cases, 
and in this it was not the Baron's downfall 
alone that they meditated, but the deliverance of their partner in guilt : the 
merchant now in jeopardy. Of such unlawful arts of magic, the Prior added, 
that his Highness himself had once proof, 
when the precious ring, that was to render him invincible in battle, was conjured 
away from under the bolts and locks of 
his casket, (those remaining unbroken,) 
and was conveyed away by the Earl of 
Kent, as his Highness had declared, and 
given to his dire enemy, Llewellyn of 
Wales, then in arms against him. 

The King seemed struck with this, but 
not well pleased with the choice of this 
time for remembering an occurrence, 
which, it is true, he had himself in council 





asserted to be supernatural ; and had even 
urged, amongst other matters, in accusation of the loyalty of that lord. His 
Highness seemed not well to know how 
he should take this speech of the Prior, 
and he cast upon him an eye of doubt, 
but he said nought. 

' My liege," added the Prior, " when I 
saw the astoundment, that came over the 
Bai'on de Blondeville, this morn in the 
chapel, I guessed it was a spell that fixed 
him. When I saw him in the hall, this 
night, twice in the same state, I held more 
surely it was so ; but, when I beheld 
that marvellous delusion of the pageant, for 
who could suppose such surpassing scenes 
were wrought by hands — when I beheld 
that, I was convinced, in very truth, that 
magic was at work ! and so I doubt not 
was my Lord Archbishop, by his gestures. 

The King, assenting in his mind to this 
latter assertion, having observed, as before 





rehersed, the gesture of the Archbishop, 
turned towards him, and asked why he 
made that sacred sign ? To which the 
Archbishop answered, he had used it to 
protect his Highness and all around from 
the evil, that he perceived was near him. 
At these words the countenances of the 
Baron and of the Prior brightened. Further the King inquired, why twice in the 
hall, when he had asked the same question, 
the Archbishop had returned no answer ? 
To this, the Archbishop again made no 
reply ; but bent his head with that look, 
both solemn and submissive, which he had 
before put on : till, being further urged, 
he replied, he " had not dared to answer !" 
on which the King showed surprise and 
displeasure ; but then seemed, on a sudden, to restrain the expression of either. 

The Prior said, the Archbishop had 
done well ; but the Archbishop showed no 





pleasure at this, and deigned not to turn 
an eye on the Prior. 

" Did you," said the King, " think your 
answer would endanger you ?" 

" My liege, I knew I should be endangered by it." 

" How ! when I commanded ?" said the 
King ; " but you feared the force of magic? 

" No ! my liege." 

The King looked again astonished, and 
the Prior curious. '•' Whence then was 
your danger ?" said his Highness. 

 From the malice of an evil sprite, 
my liege !" answered the Archbishop. 

At this, the Prior, with a sarcastic 
countenance, said, " Perhaps, my Lord 
Archbishop has not told the whole : I 
have heard it said, — I speak it with submission, for I mean not to throw slander, 
— I have heard it said he doubts of mtchcraft, if so he may doubt of magic !" 



 

On this, the Archbishop, turning loftily 
to him that spoke, said, " The Archbishop 
of York comes not to the King's court 
to make confession to the Prior of St. 
Mary's ! " 

Then the King, seeing the weighty 
displeasure of my Lord of York and the 
rising anger of the Prior, interposed, and 
put an end to further question between 
them ; but the Archbishop's eyes were 
sternly fixed upon the Prior's, which fell 
beneath them. He then craved a private 
hearing of the King, for to-morrow, and 
departed; leaving the Prior angry and 
confused, but not dismayed ; for, soon as 
he was gone, he said in a low voice, 
which yet might be heard by the King, 
" so depart from me all prejudice and 
callousness of heart." 

To which the Baron said, " Such is my 
wish too." 

The King, convinced, by this time, of 





the innocence of Maister Henry, the versifier, ordered with kind words that he 
should be dismissed, and then, commanding all present to avoid the chamber, save 
the Baron de Blonde ville, and the Prior of 
Saint Mary's, remained in close council 
with them, though it were past midnight. 
Meanwhile, the whole company below 
in the hall remained close shut up, while 
the search was yet going on in the chambers and gallery above, for those, who 
might have been concerned in this marvellous deception. There were the marshal, 
the steward, the constable of the castle, 
and other great officers attending, to look 
after the little ones ; but none of them 
could find either the supposed knight, or 
the glee-man. There were divers sayings 
and reports went forth on this matter, as, 
indeed, you must expect, without my telling ; but most present held this strange 
accident was brought about with magic, 





and that by the inveterate malice of the 
Baron de Blondeville's accuser and his 
secret friends. Some few there were who 
remarked, that by this same power of 
magic, did he possess it, the prisoner had 
done better to release himself from prison 
bond, but these were soon put to silence 
uy others ; and, whatever was thought, 
nothing more was said. 

And so ended the festival in hall, this 
night, every one departing to his lodging 
in the castle, or to his home in his own 
or his friend's castle, or mansion, with his 
own thoughts on the strange accident, that 
had befallen. 

And, whatever might pass that night 
in this hall, raised up by beings of another 
region, nothing was known of it by those 
of this ; for none would venture thither ; 
and none, save the poor prisoner in his 
tower, would even look down from the 
chamber upon the windows of that hall. 





And SO that place was in darkness and in 
sUence, which so lately had been illuminated, had echoed with song and laugh, 
and was animated with the pomp of 
beauty and of a court — emblem of life 
and death ! 

The darkness of the hall was observed 
of the merchant from his turret latticefor, he had watched much there this 
night, led thither by the sound of minstrelsy, and by a longing of his spirit to 
hover over the haunt of beings like unto 
himself. In the misery of his solitude, his 
heart would often change, and, like unto 
one tossing on a fever bed, who continually shifts his limbs in the hope of a little 
ease, so he went from his pallet to his 
window to escape from his own thoughts, 
and from his window to his pallet to avoid 
those sounds of joy and revelry, at which 
his heart sometimes sickened, when he remembered his wife and children, yet igno




rant of his condition and his dead friend, 
whose cruel assassin was now his own 
dangerous enemy. Thus, he passed the 
hours, which to most in the castle had 
gone by with joy and abundance ; he 
alone being ignorant of those marvellous 
appearances, which the Prior had not scrupled to say were raised by his art. 

And so strongly did the Prior urge to 
the King, this night, the danger to be 
dreaded not by the Baron only, but by his 
Highness, from the powerful malice of the 
agents of the prisoner, acting by his art, if 
he were suffered to live, that the King 
resolved to have the matter fully inquired 
into to-morrow, in open court, his-self, 
sitting on the bench. But the Prior and 
the Baron, who had overheard the Archbishop's entreaty for a hearing, and feared 
he might unsettle the King's resolution, 
urged the matter still further, and representing the danger of waiting a jury-trial, 





dared to hint at sentence by other modes. 
The Baron even finished by saying, that 
not a moment of his life was safe, while 
his malicious accuser lived. 

Whether the King fully understood, or 
no, what they meant by the words '• other 
modes,' he did not fall into their plan, 
but repeated, that on the morrow, a Jury 
should be summoned. 

They then spoke plainly of trial hy ordeal, but his Highness instantly rejected 
it. It was indeed over bold of them to 
propose such trial, knowing, as the Prior 
must know, that King Henry had shown 
his abhorrence of it, even in the first year 
of his reign, when he had abolished that 
cruel instrument of fraudulent oppression. 
And his Highness seemed not now well 
pleased ; for, he straight dismissed them 
both, for this night. 

Forth they went of the King's chamber 
together, and withdrew to consult further 

 





on this affair. It is plain the Baron had 
by some means gained the Prior, who was 
no true son of the church, to his interest. 
It was agreed between them, that he 
should lose no time in gaining admittance 
to the prisoner, for his own purposes, 
which might be done, under pretence of 
confessing him ; and that before he left the 
castle, this night. Having fully settled 
their plot, they quitted the chamber, and 
were returning to the great stair-case 
through the brown gallery, now left of 
every one, who had rejoiced there, that 
day, when the Baron made a sudden stop, 
and, taking a torch from the hands of one 
of the silver images, which lighted that 
gallery, shook it on high. 

The Prior, turning to inquire wherefore 
this was done, saw standing beside them, 
that same armed knight, who had appeared in the hall! While the Baron 
stood with eyes fixed upon this stranger. 





a wound in the forehead opened, and 
distilled three drops of blood, which fell 
unnoticed on the Baron's robe. 

The Prior had well nigh sunk to the 
ground, but recovered himself enough to 
utter faintly, after some solemn words, — 
" Who art thou ?" The knight frowned 
upon him, but spake not; and presently 
disappeared, leaving the dismayed companions almost senseless. 

They, however, left the gallery together ; but, when they had reached the 
head of the stairs, the sound of cheerfid 
voices was heard in an antechamber, and 
the Baron, encouraged by them, turned 
thither. But those, who talked, were 
only pages in waiting on some lord of the 
court, and they were still speaking of the 
marvellous occurrence in the great hall, 
that night, when the Baron appeared. 
Standing aside to let him pass, they wondered at his wild looks, as he went on to 
 





an inner chamber, where their masters 
sat. 

The Prior, having also taken a light 
from one of the silver warriors, that held 
torches over the great stair-case, descended 
alone, and was passing through the upper 
court of the castle, when, finding himself 
approaching one of the King s guard, on 
watch, he immediately extinguished the 
torch, and passed the man without it ; 
but, whether he took his way to the prison-tower, or to the castle-gate, his further course was unknown ; for, he was no 
more seen, that night. 



THE THIRD DAY 



THE THIRD DAY. 

Here was a drawing of a castle seated loftily on a 
rock, hung with thick wood, and having many towers on the precipice. In the margin was a portrait 
of an Archbishop, in his pontifical robes, probably 
designed for the Archbishop of York. 



THE THIRD DAY. 



On the mom next following the day 
of festival, my Lord of York had long 
speech of the King, and it was supposed, 
amongst other things, that he had been 
arguing against the truth of magic ; for 
he was suspected of divers notions of that 
sort ; it was also thought, that he had 
given no very favourable opinion of that 
same Prior of Saint Mary's. However 
this might be, his Highness, when he came 
forth of his chamber, was noticed to be 
thoughtful, and somewhat sad, and, though 
the summons for a jury was that day 
issued, his Highness seemed willing to let 
that matter rest awhile. 





Instead of sitting in court of justice 
and on the judgment-seat, as he had sitten 
at Winchester, his Highness went hunting 
the stag in the forest, to his own contentment and to the great joy of his courtiers. And, ywis, this was a better chace, 
through these deep glades, and woods, 
than that upon the wooden mountain in 
the great hall ; and more sweet and cheerily did the bugles sound along the valleys and upon the open hills than through 
the roofs and galleries of Kenilworth. 
There went with the King all of estate 
in the court (save the bishops) with the 
foresters of Ardenn, and also a train of 
gentils and gallants, to the number of 
many hundreds, and a great throng of 
people on foot. 

The forest was covered with them, for 
miles, and nothing but the sound of bugles and other joyous instruments was 
heard through these deep shades, where 





quietness had dwelt, day and night, for 
so long a time before. Others there were, 
I guess, besides the beasts, lay hid in 
those pathless shades, listening to the 
revel rout afar off, and trembling too for 
very hfe, as it drew near ; for, the forest 
was so wild and wide, spreading out on all 
sides and touching divers countries, that 
it was one of the chief hiding places for 
out-laws and desperate men in the whole 
realm of England, as those dwelling in the 
bordering towns knew to their cost. Many 
went wandering there, whom the world 
little thought of ; and, who, had they been 
seen, could hardly have been guessed to 
belong to it, they had become so rude 
and uncouth in their seeming. 

In the chase the King 'spied the towers 
of the Lord of Warwick, high over the 
woods, and .that pleasant river of Avon, 
flowing beneath. The Earl, who was of 
his company, besought his Highness to 
 





repair thither, and to refresh himself in 
his castle ; to which the King gave consent, that he might judge of it ; his Highness being a great esteemer of the builder's 
art, and proficient in it, as his Abbey of 
Saint Peter, then rearing at Westminster, 
and the cathedral at Salisbury fully show ; 
so he rode towards that castle ; but, when 
he had mounted up the rock, he stopped 
before the great gates, in admiration of 
those warlike towers and hanging battlements, that rose so proudly over him. 
Then, he passed under the gateway into a 
court, surrounded by those towers, which 
ail know to be of such vast strength, the 
bugles echoing through every arch and 
battlement, till he reached that pleasant 
side, where the turrets hang upon the 
precipice, that overlooks the Avon river. 

As far as eye could reach, even in furthest west, to the broad hills of Gloucester, all the country, stretching below, was 

 

wood, or forest-pasture, with here and 
there the tops of spires and towers, whose 
convents and villages were so hidden in 
boughs, that, but for those little signs, 
you could not have guessed there were 
any goodly people dwelling in all that 
space. The King was well pleased with 
all that he saw at this castle, as he had 
been before ; but with notliing so much 
as with that broad and majestic round 
tower, standing guard, as it were, at the 
south-east end of the castle, with pending 
battlements, where, all night long, townmen marched around, and where, but 
high above, in that little turret, the warder keeps his watch. 



Here Willoughton laid down the manuscript, and went to a window of his 
chamber, looking towards Warwick castle, 
that he might behold under the moonlight the very towers here mentioned. He 





easily distinguished the one here pointed 
out, and, although that called the Record 
Tower, at the other extremity of the 
eastern front, was admirable for baauty 
of proportion, he had many reasons for 
preferring the other ; of which reasons 
there were two, first, that it was more 
ancient and had existed, at the time the 
manuscript referred to ; secondly, that it 
wore an aspect of severer grandeur, and 
that by its singular constiniction, it showed 
forth much of the watch-and-ward habits 
and warlike foresights of that age. Willoughton thought he could never be weary 
of looking at it, under this shadowy moonlight; and already he fancied he could perceive half-armed men, on guard, pacing 
the battlement, and the warder's fire blazing on the summit and contending with 
the moonlight. The watch-signal too he 
heard ; for, what else could be that, which 
passed on the wind, and which seemed to 
him so solemn, yet wild and so different 





from any thing heard in these " piping 
times of peace' and luxury. Curiosity, as 
to the tale he was reading, brought him 
back, at last, to the manuscript and to 
King Henry.) 



King Henry stood long at a window of 
tJiat side of the castle, which overhangs 
the Avon, and there he beheld, with dehght, the great cedars growing on a steep 
rock over the river, on whose out-spreading tops he looked down, as on a carpet 
of dark velvet, varied with silver. Certain, that castle of Warwick has a more 
pleasant scite, than this of Kenil worth ; 
for, there your eye was carried, far and 
wide, over woods to the hills of other 
countries ; where at Kenilworth, you see 
only the woods of its own valley, with the 
lake shining below them. Yet there were, 
who better liked the quiet shade of those 
majestic woods, that seemed to shut out 





all the world, save when the King brought 
it hither, than the more free and lightsome 
prospect from the walls of Warwick ; but, 
for mine own part, it was not so with me. 

When that his Highness had tasted a 
manchet and had taken a cup of the fragrant Burgundy wine, of which my Lord 
of Warwick had good store, he hunted 
back to Kenilworth, followed by some of 
Warwick, whom he knew not of. 

That night, the King kept his estate in 
the great chamber, with the Queen and all 
her Court. There were the Ejng's minstrels and there again was Pierre, the 
Queen's harper, who, by command from 
his Highness, sang forth a lay, made by 
Maria, the French Poetess, who was now 
at the Court, as aforesaid. She had presented her book to the King, full of marvelous histories, right pleasureful to hear, 
although they were not all true, nathless 
she had said to the contrary in the preamble to her book. The lay, played forth 
this night, was that of " Guildeluce and 
Gualadun," or, as some call it, " The lay 
of Eledire." This was a Knight of Bretagne famous for his high qualities, loved 
and honoiu'ed by his Sovereign, but envied and hated by many in the Court, 
who, gaining the ear of their Prince, at 
length persuaded him to banish him they 
conspired against from the Court and his 
country, leaving behind him a beautiful 
and excellent wife, whom they contrived 
to prevent from accompanying him. 

It was said by many, in King Henry's 
Court, that he commanded this lay to 
l)e sung, as a lesson to the enemies of the 
young Baron, that he suspected them of 
malice. Others said the example of Guildeluce might be a warning also to the 
young Baroness ; for, they thought that of 
the two Guildeluce was the greater hero, 
as you shall hear. This wise and valour




ous Knight, Sir Eledire, after vowing 
everlasting truth to his unhappy wife, set 
sail for England, there to seek adventures ; 
and soon he found them. After acheiving wonders, with the help of the ten 
knights he carried with him, in aid of a 
Prince of this country, he finished his 
exploit by falling in love with that King's 
daughter, contrary to all his former reputation, and setting his passion to fight 
with his duty, which had hitherto been 
sworn friends. There was a long contest, 
but unfortunately his passion conquered. 
Then, being recalled by his own Sovereign, 
who could not go on without him, having 
lost by his absence a great part of his 
territory, he carries off the young Princess, and returns to his affectionate Wife, 
estranged yet woe begone. The young 
Princess, who was as good as she was 
beautiful, soon as she heard the Knight 
had a wife, swooned away, and, not satisfied with that, died out-right. The 
Knight goes nearly mad, and his distressed 
wife, to whom no one had told the whole 
truth, goes to a hermitage in a wood, to 
find out the secret cause of his distraction. 
There she sees the corpse of the beautiful 
Princess, and all jealousy and anger are 
lost, in compassion for her piteous fate. 

Presently, the Princess by a charm is 
brought to life again ; and what does this 
excellent wife, but determine to found a 
nunnery, and resign her beloved husband 
to the beautiful Princess. But the Knight, 
her husband, would not be out-done in 
generosity, and what does he do, but 
build that very nunnery to receive her, 
and, having thus rewarded that excellent 
wife, he mames the beautiful Princess, 
without further fighting between affection 
and conscience. 

Whether the young Baroness might be 
inclined, if tried, to profit by the example 





of this excellent wife is not known ; but 
most surely some ladies would not ; for, 
they scrupled not to take pains to say, 
that this was one of those lays of Maria, 
which were not true. They would not 
give it credence for a moment. 

This lay, although we have here cut it 
short, rivalled Maister Henry's ballad for 
wearisome length ; but the sweet thrumming of Pierre made the King endure it 
better ; when it was well ended, there was 
great dancing amongst the ladies, and his 
Highness commanded the Baron de Blondeville to dance with the Lady Beatrice, 
and they went a solemn round together, 
to the joy of all that beheld them. You 
would have thought by his looks the 
young Baron had utterly forgotten what 
he had seen in hall and gallery, the night 
before ; for, none in the court seemed 
more proud, or high in spirit, than he, or 
danced with a better grace. 





The Archbishop of York was at the 
King's right hand, the whole even ; but 
the Prior of Saint Mary's came not near 
the castle, all that night. Nothing happened to disturb the festival there ; but at 
the priory was a strange accident. 

It was before the first watch of matins, 
that a lay-brother went into the priory 
church to trim the lights, when, behold ! 
the place, instead of being well lighted, 
was in total darkness, save that a gleam 
from the moon came in through the windows. Eadwyn could hardly trust his 
sight ; for, never in man's memory, had 
the tapers there ceased to bum. But. 
while yet he stood amazed, he noticed 
something shining near the East end, as 
if a person stood there ; and, the moon, 
soon after, coming out more briglitly, he 
perceived the gleaming of steel ; it was an 
armoured man standing still near a window, or rather under it. 





Eadwyn had heard of what had passed, 
the night before, in the castle-hall ; and 
he instantly became convinced this was 
the same appearance, which had caused so 
much marvel there. While yet he look 
ed the figure pointed downward to the 
ground, near its own feet; but Eadwyn 
dared not to look again, but fled, as fast 
as age would permit him, to alarm the 
whole brotherhood. 

Straight, they all flocked together to 
the church, failing not to bless themselves 
by the way ; but, when they came there, 
the lights were burning as usual, and nothing new was to be seen in the place ! 
Yet Eadwyn persisted in his say, and, 
pointing out the spot, where the supposed 
knight had stood, it was found to be over 
a grave- stone, without a name — so antient 
did it seem. The monks pored upon the 
stone ; but, if a name had ever been there, 
not a letter could now be traced ; and, if 





any present did guess whose bones were 
laid beneath, not one did choose to say. 

The disturbance, caused by this strange 
accident, soon reaching the ears of the 
Prior, he forthwith came to the church, 
and, seeing the brethren in such number 
over this grave, it was noticed he looked 
more stern than ever ; but, when they told 
what brother Eadwyn had related, he 
made light of the matter, and said, that 
his health must be looked to, for that infirmity of mind foretold infirmity of body. 
Then, he ordered him straight to his cell, 
there to diet on bread and water, for seven 
days. 

Thus he ended the matter for this 
night, and in less than seven days did 
brother Eadwyn, poor man, end his sentence, for, he died on the fourth day, 
being of above three-score and ten years, 
and of spare habit, having never been 
much in the Prior's favour. As he was 





proceeding to his cell, the prior failed not 
to foretell from what he called the distemper of the brain, that his end was approaching ; but all, who heard him, took 
not this matter, as he willed. He ended 
by warning the brethren not to go by 
night into the church, save at usual times, 
when all assembled, lest the folly of Eadwyn might disturb their minds with 
strange dreamings. Some, who heard him, 
smiled in secret, notwithstanding their 
grave deportment, and others, with wonder and trembling, promised to obey. 



THE FOURTH DAY 



THE FOURTH DAY. 

Here was a drawing of a forest, with a long 
cavalcade and procession, in other modes of the 
Court, winding under the shades. In the distance, 
where the light fell, tents appeared in a pleasant glade, and thence seemed advancing a body 
of Archers. 



THE FOURTH DAY. 



King Henry having commanded, that 
his court of justice should open, on the 
morrow, in the White-hall, in the castle, 
to administer the laws of his realm, summoned, this day, a court of pleasure, to 
attend him in the forest. The Archbishop was not of his train. Early in the 
morning, he had departed on his way to 
Coventry, a short journey from this castle, 
to visit the Bishop, Roger de Wesham, 
who there lay sick, at Saint Mary's. And 
this he did not only in kindness towards 
him, but for certain more private reasons. 
Since his discourse with the King, his 

 



 

Highness had seemed willing to move 
more deliberately in this business of the 
Baron, and to sift it to the bottom, that 
the foul slander, as he held it to be, which 
had been thrown upon his favoured servant, might be exposed, as well as that his 
life might in future be shielded from the 
evil arts of sorcery, if such should appear 
to have been practised by his accuser, in 
the hali of banquet. 

His Highness guessed not, that other 
than just means might be resorted to 
against the merchant's life, while he remained in prison, friendless and a stranger, as he was, in this place ; much less 
suspected he, that, in his own court of 
justice a verdict might be given against 
an innocent man. A jury had been suminoned in this matter, and had been ordered to be in readiness, however suddenly 
called upon to meet in court. And there 
the matter rested, his Highness, meaning 
to keep up this festival with princely 





diversions, having gone forth, with the 
Queen and all his coiut, to divert himself 
in the chase of Kenilworth and forest of 
Ardenn. 

The Queen was in her litter, hung 
with purple velvet, broidered with gold, 
drawn by milk-white steeds richly harnessed; six esquires riding before her; 
with divers of her Court, and six pages 
running beside her, and compassed all 
about, with noble ladies and officers of 
her state. Chiefest among the ladies, for 
gracefulness, went the Baroness de Blondeville, on a white palfrey. A palfrey 
of the like, led by two pages, followed the 
Queen, for her Highness to ride, when she 
should so mind. The Countesses of Cornwall and Pembroke-Montfort were likewise in their litters, gorgeously apparelled, 
with a press of noble dames compassing 
them about and pages and footmen. 

Before the King rode the Lord Warden 
of this forest, attended by the Verderer 
 





and other guardians of the vert and venison, with fifty archers, clothed in green, 
moving in pairs, and sounding by turns 
their bugles, with right merry glee. First 
began the four nearest his Highness, and, 
when they took breath, eight struck up, 
further on; then again six sounded, and 
so the music rose and fell throughout the 
line with most sweet changes. The sound 
roused up the stags in the forest, and 
many a one afar off was seen to bound 
athwart the avenues from shade to shade. 
But the King came not to hunt, this day, 
nor would he let an arrow be levelled at 
any he saw, though this might have been 
done, without fear of hitting; for they 
flitted from gloom to gloom, like a sunbeam among clouds, and hardly could you 
tell when they had passed. 

But that, which most delighted the 
Queen's ladies in these wild woods was 
to see the nimble squirrels climbing among 





the boughs, and springing from branch to 
branch, so full of happy life it was a pleasure to behold. And some, when they 
had gained the topmost boughs, would 
quietly sit, cracking the chesnuts and securely looking, with their full, quick eyes, 
on the company below. 

There, I fear, were some, overborne 
by their own evil passions and galled by 
the consciousness of them, who might look 
up to those poor animals, with momentary 
envy. And doulDtless many, who had not 
these painful reasons for choice, thought 
it were better so to live amongst these 
woodlands, in blessed ease and sprightly 
health, than confined in the golden trammels of a court, where every feeling was 
checked, that it might move only to certain steps of order, and nature was so 
nearly forgotten, that, if perchance she did 
appear, she was pitied and reproved for 
a child of ignorance, and straight altered 





after their own fashion. And there were 
few, who, when they came abroad amongst 
the hills and forests and the free air and 
the open sunshine, and heard the joy of 
birds, and saw the playful grace and glee 
of animals, there were few, who felt not 
their spirits dance, although they knew 
not it was in sympathy with free and 
guileless nature, which, if they never more 
could resume it, yet could they never, 
even in spite of themselves, entirely cease 
to love. 

This noble company had not gone many 
miles under these forest shades, ere their 
horns were answered by others, afar off, 
that made every hill and dell to ring ; yet 
feared they not what this might mean, nor 
made halt to inquire. Presently, coming 
where the woods opened, they espied in a 
green lane a demi-circle of tents, and on 
the hills beyond a body of archers — outlaws they seemed to be — three hundred at 





the least, drawn up in battle-array, as if 
ready to meet them. The noble company 
nothing damited, still advanced, and the 
King ordered his bugles to sound a parley ; 
the which was no sooner done, than all the 
echoes of those hills answered with horns, 
and straight the captain of the band came 
down upon that little plain, attended by 
twelve of his archers and by two pages, 
one leading a brace of milk-white greyhounds, in a chain of steel, the other bearing his bow and arrow. These approached the King, cap in hand, and then, dismounting from their hobbies, the captain, 
who was no other than the King's bowman 
of this forest, taking his bow and arrow 
from the page, fell on one knee, and presented them to his Highness. 

The King, having shot off the arrow, 
graciously returned the bow, with a puise 
of gold, and bade him rise, which he refused to do, until his Highness, and the 





Queen should grant his petition, which 
was, that they would repair to the tents, 
and there rest ; while his archers sought 
to entertain them with their bows. This 
granted, the bow-bearer rose, and, leading 
those snowlike greyhounds, whose necks 
were bound with collars of ebony inlaid 
with silver, presented them to the King, 
as lord of this forest. But they were the 
Queen and her ladies, who best welcomed 
those delicate animals, admiring their slender forms and dainty coats, white as the 
ermine on their own mantles. 

Forthwith, their Highnesses, with this 
noble company, repaired to the tents, 
where they found venison ready prepared 
for them, with other game, such as these 
woods afforded, and wines and fruits of 
Autumn, all set forth on boards dressed 
out with oaken boughs, so that every table 
seemed a bower. The rustic seats of the 
King and Queen were raised on turf, not 





carpeted with tapestry, but strewed with 
flowers, and, for their canopies of estate, 
they had arching branches of chesniit, 
wreathed with sweet woodbine. The 
wine was brought in beechen cups, carved 
from that noble tree, that stretched forth 
its mighty branches over the King's tent, 
and then sent out its spray, so lightly 
and so proudly, above the flag of England 
waving there. Also, instead of damask 
water in golden ewers, water, clear as 
crystal was brought in beechen cups, and 
in hunters' horns, bound with silver, from 
the wild brook, that ran among the rocks, 
and that made, in its lonely course, still 
music under the green shadows. 

It was a goodly sight to behold the 
tents ranged beneath the trees on the 
short sward, filled with fresh ladies and 
other noble company ; and the King's 
tent, where attended the Lord Varder 
and all the officers of the forest, in their 
 



 

peculiar habits of ceremony — encompassed 
hy his archers in green, with lords and 
knights in hunting habits, and with esquires and pages in his Highness's livery, 
glittering with divers colours. The place 
of every one was so well ordered, that 
there seemed not any crowd ; each rank 
being set forth to the eye in due degree of 
beauty and proportion, one beyond another. And first, between the tents, stood 
the King's demi-lances, and the archers, 
who had run before him ; behind these 
were the King's horsemen, and others of 
his train. Somewhat apart stood the 
Queen's litter, having her cloth of estate 
over it, with her richly caparisoned palfrey,, and pages in waiting ; near it were 
the sumpter-litters of her sister, and of 
the Countess of Pembroke-ISlontfort, with 
coursers, squires and grooms, countless. 
But the chief sight was the tents circling 
this pleasant green, all filled witli estates 





and gentils, freshly apparelled, and with 
banquet-boards so gaily decked, and the 
lofty trees of l>eech and oak that overtopped 
them alL 

On the hills, opposite to the demi-circle 
of these tents, were drawn out the three 
hundred foresters, who feigned to be outlaws of the forest, presenting Robin Hood 
and his company. 

And, when the King and Queen had 
refreshed themselves, the Lord Warden of 
Ardenne, his-self, w ho had withdrawn from 
the banquet, came riding up to the tent, 
Ijlowing the ivory horn, which was hung 
about his neck with a chain of silver, and 
which was the sign of the charter, by 
which he held his office, and having done 
homage, asked, if it so pleased his Highness, to see his archers shoot ; to which a 
gracious answer being given, the Warden 
gave signal to the bow-bearer, who straight 
made sign to his men, and the whole troo 


 

shot off their arrows, which had whistles 
in the head, with so loud a noise as amazed 
and rejoiced the hearts of all present, and 
roused the stags from their coverts, and 
sent the birds from their leafy homes in 
flights, athwart the sky. 

Then, were many noble bows drawn to 
shoot at the deer, as they scudded away 
under the shades ; but the Queen benevolently said, " Nay ; shall our delight in 
these pleasant woods, be the cause of suffering to their innocent tenants ! Let 
every beast and bird be free and happy 
now, as we are." And his Highness said 
it should be so this day, and forbade them 
to shoot. A fence had been fixed, as was 
the worthless way, and the game was to 
have been driven into it, and there shot 
at by her Highness and the ladies of her 
court. For this purpose, also, there had 
been prepared arrows, plumed with peacock's feathers, and having heads of bright 





silver ; and now, that a better sport might 
not be lost, hazel wands were set up, at 
due distance ; from which were suspended 
garlands of roses, roses of Provence, the 
Queen's country, for such they seemed, 
whether the work of nature or of cunning 
skill ; and at these garlands the ladies of 
her Highness practised for prizes, which 
the Queen distributed, who, naithless that 
this adventure had seemed to fall out by 
accident, was well aware of all that was 
to happen, and came prepared for it. 

His Highness's sister, the Lady Pembroke-Montfort, won a golden arrow, and 
the young Baroness de Blondeville a silver bugle ; which the Baron, her lord, 
tuned up in most sweet triumph of her 
victory. 

After these feats, the archers of Robin 
Hood practised with their bows, the hazelwands having been removed to more than 
treble the distance ; and they played off 





such cunning skill, as made marvel all 
those, who had before prided themselves 
in their own performances. Often were 
the rosy garlands scraped by their darts ; 
or the hazel-wands that held them, shivered. A sheaf of silver arrows and a 
bow were the prize of the Lord Warden, 
the captain of the band, who was also 
well-known to be the best bow-man. After they had ended this sport, they went 
through divers courses and devices on 
horseback, feigning a battle, and sounding 
their bugles, and hiding in the woods ; 
and then coming back, in pursuit of one 
another, to the great dehght of the whole 
court ; and to none jnore than to the 
Prior of Saint Mary's, who was in the 
King's train ; for he joyed in sports of the 
forest more than well became one of his 
calling. 

And no sooner was this ended, than 
there was heard from that woody brow, 




behind the tents, a sound of sweet minstrelsy, of tabours and flutes and viols 
and other joyous instiaiments, the which 
signal was well understood of many present. Straight, the King and Queen, with 
the chief nobles and gentils of their courts, 
departed thither-ward, whence the sound 
came, leaving the rest and the archers of 
the forest, to make merry in the tents. 

Havhig gone up, beneath the woods, 
their Highnesses came at last to that lofty 
brow, where the minstrels were assembled, 
and which overlooked the country, far 
and near, except where the forest-oaks 
now and then interrupted the prospect. 
There might you see, as you looked down 
under their dark branches, the towers of 
Kenilworth far off in the sun ; and, beyond them, all that wide forest-region, 
read ling to the C barn wood-hills in Leicestershire : so distant, they seemed blue 
as the air above them, and none here 





would have guessed what ancient woods 
were on the steep sides, dark even as 
these oaks, which stretched their boughs 
athwart that lightsome blue. 

But neither the lofty spire of the Abbey church of Leicester, Saint Mary de 
Pratis, nor the town could be spied ; for 
they lay low at the feet of these hills. 
On another side, you had but to look 
down, where you could find an alley in 
the woods, to behold the Castle of Warwick proudly over-topping the vale, and 
seeming the very lord of those plains, tliat 
spread out on all sides, even to the hills 
of Gloucester, which his Highness had 
noted from that castle's walls. Some said 
you might perceive the stately tower of 
Gloucester Abbey ; but of this I know 
not ; for, my eyes could never make it 
out ; yet it might be seen by others, which 
had not pored so many midnights by the 
blunt light of tapers ; for, this makes 





things of day, if they be far off, invisible 
to eyes so used. 

I do remember me, when Robert of 
Gloucester vaunted of his Abbey, Saint 
Mary de Pratis, at Leicester, he said from 
top-most spire you might see beyond a 
hill of Ardenn ; but I believed him not, 
taking it for a triumph over our Priory, 
which he said was so darkly closed in 
of forests, it seemed more like a cell of 
penance than a good prior's house. And 
when I asked him how often in the princely 
castle, that stood nigh his Abbey, King 
Henry had kept his court, he was put to 
silence, though he might have remembered that our good King did, at his Abbey, 
first receive the crown he wore. 

From this hill, too, you might espy the 
town of Coventry, with Saint Mary's, and 
the convent spires of that village of Eaton, called of the nuns, Nuneaton. Certes, 
this was a pleasant brow ; for, wherever 



 


 



the woods opened, these wide prospects 
spread ; yet, turning from them, you seemed 
hid in boughs and lonesome wilds, where 
neithei' town nor castle could be seen, 
nor any pomp, save that blessed one of 
these shades ; nor any living thing, but 
what they bred. 

And here, where the oaks stretched 
round a green plat, leaving only a little 
opening towards those blue forest hills of 
Charnwood, here was a noble tent prepared for King Henry and his court ; there 
was none other on this spot ; but seats 
were cut in the turf around, under the 
boughs for such as were not of estate ; 
and there, too, sat the minstrel, tuning up 
with merry glee, opposite to the King's 
tent, where the woods parted. 

When this noble company had rested 
awhile, and had taken leche lardys and 
wine, and b.ad spied out from this summit 





all, which those, who knew the country, 
pointed out to them, the Countess of Cornwall went forth of the King's tent ; and, 
according to the pleasant fashion of her 
countiy, danced on the green-sward under 
the trees, with the Lord Simon de Montfort. She moved with a noble grace, as 
was reported by those present ; first, in a 
bass-dance ; and then, springing up with 
lighter grace, she ended with a measure 
that showed off all the gaiety of her own 
land, and so much rejoiced the heart of 
the Queen, her sister, that, but for her 
dignity, she would have danced also. I 
guess it brought back to her mind the 
festivals of her father's court, in that pleasant land of Southern France, called Provence, where they love to sport in the 
- open air, nigh the shade of woods, and 
will pass a summer's day to the sound of 
flutes and viols ; their banquets being of 





fruit, fresh gathered from the orange-trees 
and the vines, and being laid forth on the 
grass, beside some windling brook. 

And it was to pleasure the Queen, with 
a banquet like to what she had been 'customed to in her own country, that King 
Henry had thus come forth into these forest-shades. This was a day, that suited 
well his purpose ; it was a calm, sunshine day, when the air, so balmy soft, 
showed every near object as if nought but 
crystal interposed — and every thing distant — hills, water, sky, as it were dressed 
in azure ; it was surely a blue day, such 
as is seldom seen in our Island prospect, 
save in the parting month of autumn, 
though often in that pleasant part of 
France, where these diversions seem devised to make the most of the climate. 

When that the Countess of Cornwall 
had ended her dance, the Queen invited 





several foreign noble lords and ladies, visitors from her own land, to dance divers 
rounds of their own country. Amongst 
these the Baron de BlondeviUe figured ; 
and truly, when he led off the dance most 
joyed in by the villagers on the banks of 
the Rhone, none did so lightly bound, nor 
throw up his cap in the air, with gayer 
grace than he. As for the young Baroness, who could trip more blythely, or 
more delicately express every joyful feeling than she showed here, this day ? 

Lightly as the willow-spray. 
Dancing to the airs of May. 

And thus this noble company disported 
themselves, until the day was far spent ; 
and then set they forth in state and order 
for Kenilworth, the whole troop of forestarchers attending the King to the gates of 
the castle, whence they departed not till 





after due regale, nor till the sun had well 
nigh gone down. As they went, his Highness's command was conveyed to them, 
that they should attend him to hawk 
on the river of Avon in the forest, and 
should there partake his banquet. 



THE FIFTH DAY AND NIGHT. 



THE FIFTH DAY AND NIGHT. 

Over this Chapter was a drawing of the poor 
Merchant's prison-chamber ; it was night ; for, 
a lamp burned beside the pallet, on which he laystretched. A face appeared dimly behind the grating in the back wall. 



THE FIFTH DAY AND NIGHT. 



This day, the King's Court of Justice 
was opened in the White HaU of Kenilworth, and divers matters adjudged there ; 
but the cause of the merchant came not 
on. It hath been already related, that 
King Henry was inclined to move more 
deliberately in this matter than he had 
at first been ; but there were some about 
him who were desirous to urge it to a 
conclusion, before the return of the Archbishop of York from Coventry : and for 
this they had weighty reasons of their 
own. It has been shown, that the Archbishop inclined somewhat to the cause of 

 





the poor merchant, and that he was no 
friend to the Prior of Saint Mary's. Now, 
neither the Prior, nor the Baron de Blondeville, augured well to themselves from 
the Archbishop, seeing the manner in 
which he had held himself towards them ; 
and they sought, by all means, to have the 
prisoner disposed of, before the return of 
that powerful and intrepid prelate. 

This day, the Prior came to the castle ; 
and, after a private conference with the 
Baron, in which they settled their plot, 
the Prior craved hearing of the King, and 
set forth somewhat of the strange appearance at the Priory, on a late night ; but he 
told only as much of the truth of that adventure as suited himself, and added to it 
as much falsehood as he dared. Having 
then declared the whole to be some new 
artifice, practised by the secret friends 
of the merchant, he besouglit the King 
to relieve the Baron from the unseen dan




gers, made to impend over him by the 
malice of his enemies, and which, he said, 
would not cease so long as his accuser remained unpunished ; for that the accusation was a guilty one he had no doubt. 
To this entreaty the Baron joined his, 
that the King would end this matter, as 
might seem right to his Highness, pleading that his peace and honour were alike 
in jeopardy, during every hour of this season, in which he had looked only for joy 
and gladness ; since, however fully and 
highly he was honoured by his Highness's 
favour, and however he his-self might seem, 
in the face of the court, to bear the slander, neither he, nor any one of those most 
dearly connected with him, had known one 
moment of real comfort, since the accusation was first made. 

The truth of this King Henry admitted ; yet was he firm in refusing to hasten 
unduly the trial of the merchant ; and 
 





they, suspecting that his motive for this 
was chiefly to have the Archbishop present when it should come on, urged their 
})etitions, till his Highness's visible displeasure put an end to further hearing. 
And thus the business rested for this time : 
the Prior departing for his chamber, and 
the Baron to prepare himself to attend 
the King, in the great chamber, where 
liis Highness was to keep state. There 
was rehearsed before the King a Servantois, composed by Maister Denis Pyramus, setting forth divers brave deeds of 
chivalry. Nothing extraordinary happened this night ; and the Court broke up at 
the usual time, every one seemingly well 
contented and at peace. But, what human being may look into the secrets of 
the heart? many, that lay beneath this 
roof, from King down to serving-man, 
were pressed with heavy cares, each in his 





way, but none more heavily than the 
Baron de Blondeville. 

Now every one was gone to his own 
chamber, for all night, and the Wayte, 
with his groom bearing the torch, was 
going his second round, when a person 
passed athwart the upper court, who answered not the watch- word. Both the 
old man and his boy saw this person beside them ; but he was gone, before the 
challenge was repeated ; and he was so 
muffled up in his garment, they could 
distinginsh neither shape, nor feature. 
But they had marked the way he went, 
and they followed his steps, which led 
them to that great tower, still called of 
Caesar, which was the keep ; on it pended 
the prison-turret of the merchant. Marvelling who might go there at this hour so 
privily, they tried the door of entrance, but 
found it fast, and then the bars of the 
tower windows, and they too were safe. 





The great gate of the Port-cullis, where 
the wardours kept guard, opened not into 
this court, but over the ditch, on the other 
side of the tower ; or the wayte would have 
speedily given the alarm., for he thought 
all was not right. 

He guessed he had mistaken the way 
this person had gone ; but, stepping back 
and looking up at the tower, his boy spied 
a light passing by a casement, on high, 
which he knew led up a stair-case to the 
prison-chamber. So the old man suspected 
some plot was going forward for the liberty of him confined there, and he gave an 
alarm at the door beneath ; presently on 
which, he heard the keeper's voice within ; 
who, being asked whether any one had just 
entered the tower, answered " No ;" and, 
being then asked whether any one had 
passed up the stair-case with a light, he 
said he knew not, others were dwelling in 
the place, besides himself. The wayte told 





him what he had seen in the court, and 
that he suspected some one had entered 
the tower with a false key ; to which the 
keeper answered, that could not have been 
without his hearing ; and bade him go on 
his watch-way, and, if his sight had not 
deceived him, he would find, perchance, 
the person he suspected lurking within the 
court, in the porch, perhaps, of the great 
hall, or under the arch- way of the white 
tower. Though the old man thought all 
was not right, he went his way, and 
searched the places noted and every other 
corner of the court ; but he found no one. 
The more marvelling, he determined to 
look well to the prison-tower, and, if any 
one came forth of it, to seize him, if he 
might be strong enough. 

And so, having sung out his second 
round, for this night, he concealed his 
torch, within a buttress-nook, where it lay 
smouldering; and then, with his boy, he 





took his station in the front of King Henry's lodging, which was opposite to Caesar's 
tower. Little did his groom-boy help 
him ; for, he was soon asleep and snoring 
loudly enough to bid any one lurking in the 
court to beware of his master ; the torch 
itself could not more surely have betrayed their station ; but the aged man, who 
could better wake than slumJDer, sat still 
and watchful on the bench, within that 
porch, often silencing, though it were 
but for a minute, his drowsy companion. 
Still and watchful did he sit in that 
gloomy porch below ; but there was one as 
still and wakeful in the tower above, lying on his pallet, full of grievous care and 
dread of what might happen. 

This poor merchant, when he knew of 
what he was accused, saw, that his destruction was appointed, and that the Baron de Blonde ville, to save himself, had 
contrived this pretence of delusions and 





evil arts practised by him. He had been 
told to prepare himself for trial " on the 
morrow ;" and he suspected not that he 
was deceived, or that there could be any 
motive for deceiving him, in that respect. 
The King, as before said, had steadily refused to have the merchant tried on the 
morrow ; who, notwithstanding, had been 
bidden to hold himself in readiness for 
that day. And to that morrow he now 
looked with dread and despair ; for, how 
could he defend himself from that terrible 
shadow, which he heard his enemies designed to raise up against him ? how strike 
a phantom, which, though armed with 
the deadly weapons of malice, was invulnerable as the air — the phantom of sorcery ? Thus, he foresaw that his sentence 
was passed : and, when he thought of his 
distant home, his wife and children, who, 
ignorant of his wretched state, were now 
expecting him with fond impatience, from 
 



a foreign land, and whom he must never 
more behold; — when he thought of this, 
he was little able to meditate what he 
should say, or do, when he should be confronted with his enemies. Thus he passed 
several hours. 

At last, when he considered the virtuous motive, which had led him into this 
jeopardy, and the wickedness of his accusers, pious confidence began to possess 
his mind ; indignation struggled with his 
grief, and his apprehensions vanished. In 
these moments, he believed himself capable of rousing conviction in the minds of 
the judges, by the strength and eloquence 
of indignation alone. He forgot, that it 
had hitherto failed him with King Henry ; 
but such courageous hope rose and fell 
with his sorrow, giving place to deep despondency and weakness, whenever he 
thought much of his wife and children. 

The suddenness of his first appeal to 





King Henry prevented him from perceiving the danger of accusing the favourite 
of a prince ; nor considered he his own 
helplessness, though he was in this place 
a friendless stranger : he felt only a generous sorrow for his murdered kinsman ; 
be balanced not the difficulties with the 
justice of his purpose. And, truly, his peril arose not from any indifference of the 
King to do what was right, but from the 
want of steadiness in his mind, and from 
that mis-directed kindness of heart, which 
made even a suspicion of guilt in one he 
had esteemed and trusted so painful, that 
a conviction of it seemed not to be endured. It is well-known, that a weak 
mind, rather than have such a suffering, 
will turn aside, and take shelter in willing 
credulity to its first opinion ; a strong one, 
meeting the worst at once, will proceed 
straight forward, and, freeing itself from 
an uncertainty, will do both that, which 





is just towards others, and, in the end. 
best for its own ease. Which of these 
ways King Henry took will be more fully 
set forth hereafter. 

Such thoughts as these had not occurred to the poor merchant, when most he 
needed them ; but now, in the stillness of 
his prison, he considered of many things, 
which, amidst the interests of busy life, 
he would have passed unheeded. And 
much and often he pondered on what he 
should say, on the morrow- — the day, as 
he supposed, of his trial— endeavouring to 
prepare himself for the questions, that 
might be asked him. Importuned with 
such thoughts, he was resting on his pallet, 
a lamp burning above him ; when, without 
any previous sound even of a step, he heard 
the key turn in the door of his chamber, 
and with such cautious gentleness, as if 
some person tried by stealth to enter. He 
lay still, Hstening to what might follow ; 





but the door opened not, there being a 
bolt within, that secured the prisoner from 
nightly intrusion. Of this, the person 
without knew not ; for the key was still 
moved in the lock ; and this showed to 
the prisoner it was not the keeper, who 
sought to enter. With a dread of some 
nigh evil, he looked round, and saw, 
through the grate opening on the passage, 
a light, that seemed to come from the 
stair; and, while he watched, behold a 
hand came through the grate, and tried 
to reach the bolt, which held the door 
within. 

The poor merchant shuddered, when 
he saw those bony fingers stretched forth, 
with no weak impulse, to force back the 
bolt; and he started, when there came 
a face behind the grate, and he knew 
it to be the Prior's of Saint Mary's. His 
hand could not push back the bolt; and 
seeing, that the prisoner was now awake 





and watchful, he called to him by name, 
and desired him to unfasten the chamber. 
The prisoner demanded who came, at that 
unseasonable hour, and what he wanted ; 
on which the Prior told his name, and 
that he came to confess him and prepare 
him for his trial, on the morrow. When 
the merchant observed, that the hour was 
extraordinary for such a duty, he was answered, " it is never too late for a good 
work ;" and was desired to open the door, 
without further speaking. 

But the prisoner, misliking the visage of 
this Prior, whom he had noted, on a former occasion, and fearing some concealed 
mischief, still delayed to comply, saying, 
that for his trial he was as much prepared, as an innocent conscience could prepare him. On this, the Prior was angry, 
and said he came by the King's order. 
Whose chamber he had just left, and, in 
his name, demanded entrance. 

 

" If SO," answered the prisoner, " I marvel the keeper is not with you. Whycome you alone, and at this dead hour? 
I beseech you let me go on with my night's 
sleep, which will best prepare me for the 
morrow's trial." 

" The King's order is sufficient for my 
appearance alone," said the Prior. " I 
require not the keeper's attendance at a 
confession ; and, for his key, it is already 
in my hand ; therefore, delay no longer, 
but draw that unlawful bolt." The merchant said again he had no confession to 
make, and that, even if he had ought to 
tell, he could tell it through the grate, and 
there only would he answer, this night. 

" You know not," said the Prior, " the 
good you are refusing ; let me in, and 
you may hear that you expect not. Why 
should you suppose I come to you as an 
enemy?" 

 Father," said the prisoner, " I have 





desired rest ; and, in so saying, why should 
you suspect I take you for an enemy. I 
have never injured you, and am even a 
stranger to you ; if, therefore, I ought to 
fear admitting you to this chamber, you 
best can tell why. But I crave rest; this 
is the reason for it, and well may I marvel 
you have chosen such a time wherein to 
visit me ; and, yet more, why you come 
alone, without witness." 

" Come nearer to the grate," said the 
Prior, "and I will tell you." The prisoner 
raised himself from his pallet and advanced. " Come nearer," said the Prior ; 
to which the poor man, astonished at this 
eagerness, replied, that, where he stood, he 
could well hear even the lowest speech. 

" Others, too, may hear. What I vrould. 
say, is to yourself alone." 

" And what inducement can you have 
to confide any thing to me — a prisoner, 
without help, without council, without 





comfort, other than that of a good conscience ? Since, then, I cannot administer 
to myself, what can I administer to yon, 
that you should seek my confidence ?" 

" You may find, perhaps," said the 
Prior, " that you are neither without council nor help, if you will listen to me ;" and 
again he bade the merchant draw nearer ; 
on whose doing so, he asked him, if he 
wished for liberty? On this the prisoner 
smiled contemptuously. 

" I hear the first matin-bell," said he ; 
" it calls you — you had done better to Ije 
in your place than to have come nither at 
such an hour, to tempt me by such a question." 

" I begin to think so too,'' answered 
the Prior since you are so obstinately 
bent against yourself; but open the door, 
and I will convince you I am your friend." 

" You must convince me of that, before 
I unfasten this door." 



 


 



What other arguments the Prior might 
use are unknown, but they answered his 
purpose so far, that the poor prisoner, at 
last, gave up his fears, and admitted him 
to the chamber. Having thus entered, 
the Prior fastened the door again, and, 
holding up the lamp to examine whether 
any one was concealed in the room, the full 
light fell upon his forehead, and showed 
a deep scar, that seemed to remain from 
a sword wound. 

While the merchant stood observing his 
face, under this peculiar light, the scar 
suddenly engrossed his attention ; and he 
thought he had seen the same countenance, 
at some former period of his life. He 
had little time for recollection ; but he 
thought this was at an inn, between Tamworth and the Chase, as he was travelling with his kinsman from Worcester ; 
the latter having landed at Milford, on 
his return from beyond the sea : but the 


 



 



recollection was indistinct ; and he checked 
the fear, which was heginning to return 
upon him. 

The Prior, after his survey of the 
chamber, met one glance of the scrutinizing eyes, that were directed upon him, and 
he immediately withdrew his own ; and, 
sitting down on the low pallet, he thus 
addressed his prisoner : — " Now shall you 
know me for your friend ; for, here I tell 
you, that, if you wish to escape this night 
from the trial that threatens you, I have 
in my power the means of assisting you ; 
and am ready to use them, on one condition !" 

The prisoner, surprised and distrusting 
the motive of this offer, answered, " You 
said but now, that you came hither by 
the King's order ! Is it also by his order, 
that you bring me this offer of escape ? 
He has only to will my freedom ! and I 
shall go forth from these walls without 





any contrivance, or secret methods of my 
own." 

" Yes : and then you may, without further let, or hindrance, again sound forth 
your accusations against an innocent man ! 
It is on one condition only, that his Highness consents to your escape. As to your 
going openly forth, with his known consent, free of punishment for your accusation against the Baron de Blondeville, that 
cannot be, and he preserve his honour : 
liberty, granted to you on such terms, 
would be the Baron's condemnation. This 
you must acknowledge. There is but one 
way, that can secure both his honour and 
your safety — only one !" 

" Name it !" said the merchant. 

" It is, that you set your name to this 
paper, containing a recantation of all, of 
which you have accused the Baron before the King; and that you leave it 



behind you ere you take your secret 
flight, in sure testimony of his innocence." 

The prisoner, rising up with indignation, exclaimed, " Never ! I was witness 
to the crime, of which I have accused 
him, and never will I cease to demand justice for it ! Nor will I believe King Henry would, in this way, shelter a man, 
whose honour he would fear to bring to 
trial !" 

While he said this, the countenance 
of the Prior darkened ; and, after a short 
silence, he replied slowly : " I cannot 
doubt your knowledge of the crime ; but 
I as little doubt the innocence of him you 
have accused. You err not as to the deed, 
but as to the criminal ; and your crime 
lies in this, that you have rashly, and 
with unmeet confidence, charged a man 
with a dreadful offence, whom, even if 
he were guilty, you could have small 





means of knowing to be so. Your obstinacy, too, in persisting in this charge, 
when you have found who the accused is, 
takes away from you all claim to mercy ; 
and, understand from me, that, on your 
trial to-morrow, you are not likely to find 
any. At this hour, to-morrow night, if 
you shall be then still amongst the living, 
you will remember, in despair, the opportunity, now offered you and now passing 
away. 

Scarcely had the Prior ended, when the 
bell of Saint Mary's sounded, and his 
visage altered, while he faintly uttered 
the latter words. He was mute awhile, 
and then he said, " If you have resolved 
to proceed with this denunciation, I must 
leave you : if you doubt, mercy is still 
open to you ; but no time is to be lost — I 
must be gone !"' 

" Could I doubt, for an instant, as to the 





person of the murderer," said the agitated 
prisoner, " I should, indeed, be infamous, 
in accusing the Baron de Blondeville, and 
equally foolish in hesitating to accept your 
offer ; but my memory is faithful ; I never 
can forget the countenance of him, who 
murdered my kinsman, in my sight." 

" It is extraordinary your memory 
should have received so false an impression, if, indeed, you speak according to 
your conviction ; it is extraordinary, that, 
considering the short opportunity you had 
of observing the robber's face, you should 
be so confident in that impression ; you 
saw him only for a moment, and then by 
a torch lying on the ground. A light, so 
placed, might give a false appearance to 
any countenance." He ceased, and the 
merchant remained thoughtful and silent. 

" It is extraordinary, too," said the 
Prior, " that, recollecting so clearly, the 





countenance of one of the robbers, you 
should have no remembrance of the 
others." 

' I saw not the faces of the others. 
You were present, when I related this 
matter to the King; can you have forgotten, that I said the other robbers were 
masked during the whole outrage ?" 

 I recollect you said so. And you say 
so now again? You are sure they were 
masked ? " said the Prior. 

" Yes, I am sure," replied the merchant. 

" Yet is it strange, that the man, who 
committed the murder, should be the only 
man of the four, who exposed his face." 

" The four ! I saw but three," said 
Woodreeve, eagerly. He looked at the 
Prior, who was, for a moment, silent. 
" You must remember, I told the King, 
the assassin's visor fell off in the struggle 
with my brave kinsman." 

At this close recollection of the very 





manner of the deed, the prisoner was much 
moved ; lie groaned heavily, and threw 
himself again on the pallet, saying, ' " Talk 
no more of this cruel transaction, I beseech 
you; it goes to my heart." His visitor 
made no answer, and the merchant remained, for a short time, with his face hid in his 
hands, as if in an ecstasy of grief. When 
he raised himself and turned, he found the 
Prior standing close beside him, with an 
expression, which he did not, at the moment, understand. 

" I must begone," said the intruder ; 
'' you will repent that you have neglected the opportunity ; another will certainly 
not occur ; and you deserve not that it 
should, since you can persist, on such 
shght grounds, in accusing a stranger of 
what would affect his life. I know the 
Baron de Blonde ville to be innocent." 

Woodreeve was struck both with the 
emphasis and with the tone, in which this 

YOIL. II. I 





was uttered ; it was not the usual voice 
of the Prior ; yet did it seem the natural one, and not wholly unknown to him. 
Looking earnestly upon him, he said, 
" Who is with me ?" 

His visitor, turning quickly at the 
question, answered not the scrutiny of 
the merchant's eye, but scornfully asked, 
" Know you not the Prior of Saint Mary's?" 

" I did know a Prior of St. Mary's ;" 
said the other sadly, " you are not he. 
Moreover, your speech was but now 
changed, I knew it not for yours ; not for 
the same I had heard a few minutes before, though it seemed not unknown to 
me." 

" That is strange ; but your observance 
of my voice, seems to be about as certain 
as your recollection of the Baron de Blondeville's features ; and I should not much 
marvel, if you were to denounce it as a 
party in the same adventure. But I must 





leave you, and shall add nothing more, 
since you had rather remain a prisoner, 
with death before yom eyes, than doubt 
the correctness of your memory, or recant 
from an error, when in so doing, you 
might save the life of yourself, or, perhaps, 
of an innocent man. Call not that a love 
of justice, which is blind vengeance in its 
blackest shape." 

There was something in these latter 
words, that now struck the harassed mind 
of the prisoner, with a force, which had 
not accompanied any similar exhortation 
from his adviser ; a dreadful possibility 
was once more placed before him, and the 
moment was passing, in which by acknowledging that possibility, he might put an 
end to the fearful alternative, in which 
he stood, of losing his own life, or taking 
that of another. 

•' What if there he one possibility," 
said he to himself, " out of thousands, that 
 





I have accused an innocent person ! " and 
he shuddered with horror. 

The Prior instantly perceived the hesitation of his mind, and he waited awhile, 
that it might end in further doubts, which 
he knew would be stronger, if his now 
readier listener should forget them to 
have proceeded from his promptings, and 
should mistake them for his own. When 
he thought they had taken some hold, he 
threw out hints and argument to confirm 
his apprehensions ; and this wdth so mucli 
success, that the merchant was no longer 
sufficiently confident in his own recollection, to adhere to a purpose so surrounded with danger, either to his life, or, 
what was truly more important, and what 
he always held to be more important — to 
his conscience. But, although this shade 
of distrust might influence him, to desist 
from a further prosecution of the Baron de 
Blondeville, he was not persuaded to sign 




the recantation proposed to him, nor any 
recantation whatsoever. On this point, 
every suggestion made to him, touching 
his own security, or advantage, was vain ; 
at this moment, he held it just possible the 
Baron might be innocent, and, therefore, 
was he willing to desist from his accusation ; but he also thought it far more probable, that he was guilty, and, therefore, 
would he not affirm that he was innocent. 
The Prior, feigning more satisfaction 
than he felt, as to the progress of his 
suggestions, said, " You think the Baron 
guiltless ; your recantation must therefore 
follow, when you have had a few minutes 
further consideration. Else where would 
be the love of justice, of which you have 
said so much ? '' 

" I only doubt of his guilt," said the 
respondent in this dispute, " and that carries me no farther than a relinquishment 
of the prosecution." 





" But you certainly do not dou])t, that 
this must be insufficient to satisfy his honour. He has been publicly accused and 
it is necessary, that he should be as publickly cleared. It is also necessary" — here 
the speaker delivered himself with greater 
emphasis — " it is also necessary, that his 
accuser, if he be obstinate, should be punished for his attempt. Think you that 
punishment is likely to be slight ? If you 
remain here, certain destruction awaits 
you ; if you go away, and leave behind 
this recantation of your error, you will 
save your own life, and testify so far to 
the Baron's innocence, as to render a pursuit of you unnecessary to his reputation. 

" I knew not," said Woodreeve, " that 
you were so warmly my friend, as you 
profess yourself to be ; you seem as anxious for my welfare, after I may leave this 
place, as for the Baron's reputation." 

The Prior liked not this remark.  I 





know not," said he, " why I should be 
thus anxious, since you are so distrustful 
of my good-will, although there be mixed 
with my wish to save your life, a desire, 
that you should restore the reputation of 
an innocent man. I marvel you should 
hesitate to accept my kindness." 

The merchant still refused to sign a 
recantation, which went so much beyond 
his own conviction.  My flight, without 
this," said he, " would afford sufficient 
presumption of my doubt, and even that 
is rather a stronger word than ought to 
be applied to my mere admission of a possibihty/' 

The parties remained for a while in 
silence, one considering whether he should 
waive the recantation he had so strongly 
insisted upon, the other, whether he should 
trust himself with such a companion, even 
if he no longer required it. He feared 
some treachery in the proposal ; the offer 







of an escape might be made, only with a 
design to draw him into a virtual acknowledgment of guilty motives for his charge, 
the more certainly to accomplish his destruction. '• Suppose I were on the outside of the castle walls,'' said he,  how 
may I proceed, when beyond them, since 
I have neither horse, nor friend, to expedite me?" 

" You consent, then, to sign this ?" 
" No," replied the merchant, lifting up 
his head, with a resolute and indignant 
countenance. " If you insist on such a 
condition, here, I entreat you, conclude 
your visit, and leave me to my rest." 

The Prior now yielded. " There is a 
place, without the town," said he, " where 
you may lie hidden, till the dawn, or, if 
you fear not to traverse the woods by 
night, a horse and guide are in readiness 
for you. I am sufficiently your friend to 





help you, without insisting on further 
conditions." 

Still, the prisoner hesitated. He knew 
of no previous good-will of his advdser towards him, that could account for so much 
preparation for his safety ; he liked not to 
trust him, with such an opportunity to 
ruin him. But, while he thus feared treachery, on one hand, he saw destruction 
threatening hmi, on the other ; if he trusted to the present offer, he might perish ; 
if he awaited a doubtful contest with enemies so powerful, and so greatly inflamed 
by revenge, he felt little hope for his life. 
To declare in court, his mere admission, 
that the Baron might be innocent, would 
not be sufficient for his own release ; further his conscience would not let him go, 
and yet it was apparent, that he should be 
pressed to go further, and should be treated as a criminal, if he refused ; nothing 
would be sufficient to hij own safety, 
 


which was not so to the Baron's views ; 
his admission would be attributed only to 
fear, and it was not fear in him, which 
his adversaries wished to prove. After he 
had weighed these thoughts in his mind, 
he told the Prior he was ready to depart. 

While he yet spoke, he heard the bell 
of Saint Mary's strike, for the third time ; 
the Prior heard it too ; and he stood still 
and thoughtful. Then, starting from his 
mood, he said, " Your determination is, 
perhaps, too late ; let us begone." 

On being asked why he feared this, he 
answered, " That bell was to serve as the 
third signal." On being asked for wliat 
purpose it was to serve as a signal, he replied, without explaining, that it concerned the escape, adding, " Not a moment is 
to be lost ; while we are talking, your opportunity is fleeing ; " and he arose and 
unlocked the chamber-door. 

 Are you sure of the keeper ? " said 





Woodreeve, " and how are we to pass the 
castle gates ?" 

" There is no time for answers ; follow in silence." They left the chamber ; a 
light was burning on the head of the stair, 
which the Prior, as he descended, took up 
in his hand. The merchant perceived no 
one on the stair, save his conductor ; but 
he looked fearfully at every door-way he 
passed, expecting each moment, to see 
some one on the watch, ready to start out 
upon him. 

Having descended two flights only, the 
Prior turned into a chamber on the left, 
making sign for the merchant to follow ; 
who, fearing he was not leading him forth 
of the tower, stood still on the stair, and 
pointed downward, as though he would go 
that way only. But, the Prior stiU beckoning, and retiring with the light, he 
could not but follow into what appeared to 
be a state-room of this tower, and which 





did in truth belong to the constable of 
the castle, though not then used by him. 
Woodreeve marvelled, wherefore he was 
led to this chamber, which, for height and 
greatness, nearly equalled any at Kenilworth, and which, though scant of furniture, was yet hung with ancient arras, 
that fell from under the high windows 
down to the very floor. 

The Prior again beckoning him, he 
passed on, without inquh'ing, fearing lest 
the sound of his voice might call forth 
some one, who should have been on watch. 
This chamber led into another, separated, 
as was a third, by a wall, which, though 
lofty, did not reach the roof, excejDt by a 
row of round arches, that appeared above 
the arras, and rose to a vast height, 
making the whole extent of these three 
large chambers visible on high, like unta 
the aisle-roof of a church, though the 
partition wails concealed it below. 

 

On the top of these walls, stood many 
figures of armour, beneath the arches and 
piles of arms, which none could reach, 
save those acquainted with the secret ways 
of the chambers. These shapes exhibited 
every device of harness known — of plain 
steel, of brass, or coat of mail ; with 
helms and visors of divers sorts ; some to 
lie flat before the face, leaving only an 
opening for the eyes above ; others hiding 
the eyes, yet allowing sight and the passage of breath through the iron bars of 
the projecting visor, and some with beaver 
down, as if there were a visage behind too 
ghastly to be exposed. These were the 
state rooms of the great tower, or keep 
of Caesar ; but although assigned as the 
habitation of the Constable, they were 
never used by him, except in time of siege, 
they were so cold and comfortless. Hung 
they were with like arras from the line 
of the windows and arches, down to the 





floor, but they showed little sign of the 
living beside. 

The merchant, coming to the third 
chamber and seeing no sign of an outlet 
beyond, liked it not ; and, halting at the 
door, made signal for the Prior to return ; 
but he, waving the lamp over his head, 
noticed this only by a gesture to come 
on. As he did so, his companion could 
almost have believed some evil sprite was 
before him, so dark and strange he looked 
under that gloomy light. When the Prior 
had reached the end of this chamber, he 
stood still, till Woodreeve came up ; and 
then, checking all further question, he put 
the lamp into his hand, and, lifting up 
the arras, unfastened a door behind it ; 
beyond which appeared an arch made in 
the solid wall, of twelve or fourteen feet 
thickness. 

Several steps led up to a stone landingplace and to a loop beyond ; where, in 





time of siege, two archers could stand, 
and shoot forth their arrows, unseen of 
the enemy without. And there were 
many of the like in these chambers ; but 
the arras hid them from those, who might 
be guests. 

Woodreeve, marvelling why the Prior 
had led him thither, looked forward into the 
depth of this arch ; and there saw, by the 
dim light, a figure stand : which, for aught 
that then appeared, might be a mere bowman, ready to shoot ; till the Prior, snatching the lamp from the merchant, who had 
no power either to resist, or to flee, held 
it forward at arm's length, and it gleamed 
upon the armour of one, who seemed appointed like a knight. 

Instantly, the lamp shook in the hand 
of the Prior, and Woodreeve wondered 
not less to see his visage change to deadly 
pale, than at the shape before him, till its 
harness of a knight seemed to remind him 





of his dead kinsman. The Prior, recovering from his ecstasy, said, " 'Tis but the 
armour of the Lord Constable, which used 
to stand in this recess ; 'tis strange I should 
have forgotten this : come on ; you have 
nothing to fear !" 

But the merchant thought not so ; and 
liked not being brought hither, whence, 
as it seemed, they could go no further; 
but in this he was mistaken. A key 
having been applied by his conductor to 
a door in the side of the arch-way, it 
opened upon a passage, made in the thickness of the wall, which led to many secret 
places of this tower, and elsewhere, unknown to few, save the Lord Constable and 
the war dour : how the Prior came to be 
acquainted with it, may appear hereafter. 

The wind, that poured through this 
door, had extinguished the lamp, had not 
Woodreeve let fall the arras ; and, when 
he found himself inclosed in this arch. 

 

he lamented his attempt ; and still more 
when he saw the Prior standing darkly, at 
the foot of a narrow staircase, looking up 
it, and beckoning him to come on. His 
heart failed him, and he demanded whither he was to be led, saying he would 
go no further, till he should receive an 
answer to that question. The Prior spoke 
in a low voice, as if he feared to be heard, 
a precaution, which seemed to be unnecessary here, and said, " \Vithin the thickness of these walls, there are galleries, 
which lead to many points ; you will presently find yourself at the foot of the 
tower." 

" How can that be," said his companion, 
'• when the stairs do not descend, but 
rise r 

" Come on, and you shall see ; but first 
let me secure this door." The Prior stepped 
back ; and, as he locked it, hung the key 
to his girdle. As he flung back his weeds 





to do this, Woodreeve thought he saw the 
glitter of steel within. Other keys might 
hang there ; but he almost thought he 
saw a poinard, and he doubted whether 
it were safer to attempt going back to his 
prison, or to proceed, without betraying 
his suspicions. His conductor left him 
little time to meditate ; for, taking again 
the lamp, he went up the stair, bidding 
him tread lightly, and speak not. 

It was a short flight of steps, ending in 
a narrow passage, where once and again 
a loop supplied the place of windows. 
Now, there were within these walls of the 
grand story, galleries, that ran round the 
chambers, below the windows, which were 
made for secret communication to distant 
parts of the castle ; and, for means of security and escape, in times of siege ; some 
led up to the battlements ; others down to 
the donjon and to subterraneous avenues ; 
but whither these went finally there were 





few that could tell. The Prior was acquainted with them all, and, when the 
King's court was not at Kenilworth, he 
could, had he been rebelliously inclined, 
have surprized the ten knights, who kept 
garrison here, and have delivered the castle unto an enemy. But his treachery took 
not so wide a compass. 

Woodreeve followed through this gallery, in watchful silence, and, at the end 
of it, saw the Prior make halt, where the 
wall fell into a recess, as if a turret were 
at that corner of this tower. On coming 
up, he perceived in the floor a large opening, or well, such as is found in the strong 
holds of many castles, and is used, when 
great balls of solid stone or balistas, catapultas, and other engines of war are to be 
drawn up, for defence, during the siege. 

The Prior bent over it with the lamp, 
eyeing the depth ; and, while Woodreeve 
did the same, he saw far down within, a 




flash of light, which showed him a high 
and narrow arch at the bottom. A stronger flash made him look up to the lamp 
his conductor held, supposing it might 
have come from that ; but his eyes settled 
not on the lamp, but on the looks of the 
Prior, which were fixed in dark watchfulness ; and again the countenance struck 
him. as having been seen by him, under 
other circumstances than any, which had 
lately occurred at Kenilworth. 

He stepped hastily back from the opening ; his conductor stepped back also ; and 
he heard, at the same moment, a voice 
say, •' Wardour, mind the hour !" 

The merchant's heart sunk at the sound, 
which seemed to him the same he had 
heard, this night before, in his prison, and 
he looked again at the Prior ; but his 
lips were motionless ; and, when he had 
made a sign for silence, and had beckoned 
the merchant forward, he turned quickly 





this angle of the tower into a gallery like 
that they had left. It ended in another 
turret, but here appeared a narrow stair, 
leading, on one hand, up to the battlement, 
and, on the other, descending ; it was so 
narrow as to admit only one in front, and 
so steeply winding, that he, who followed, 
could hardly keep in view him, who went 
before. 

It ended in a small chamber, where the 
Prior again made a stand, and, gi\dng the 
lamp to his companion, he drew the bolts 
of a strong oaken door, so thickly barred 
and studded with iron, that the weight 
of it could hardly have been moved by the 
Prior alone. Here the spirits of Woodreeve revived ; for, this seemed by its 
strength to be a door of outer defence, and 
he willingly assisted to force it back. His 
disappointment was great, when he perceived, that it opened only on a straight 
and steep flight of steps. Again, he ques




tioned his conductor, who, once more, 
bade him be patient. The stejjs led to 
another door, which opened to a covered 
gallery, or passage, judged by the merchant to pass under the castle-foss, and, 
when they came to a third strong door, 
and ascended a short flight of steps, he 
doubted not the Prior was leading him 
forth of a salley-port, beyond the ditch. 

At the top of these steps, a fourth door 
appeared ; this was so stoutly fastened with 
bolts and bars, that together they could 
scarce undo them. And sorely was Woodreeve daunted, when, instead of finding it 
opening to liberty and fresh air, he saw 
beyond it only a narrow and dismal chamber, more like to a prison than even 
that he had left. His loud remonstrances 
alarmed the Prior, who again besought 
him, as he wished for freedom, to be circumspect and silent. 

" We have passed," said he, " along the 





castle wall, through that covered gallery, 
which leads from the Constable's chambers 
to the gate of entrance into the bass-court, 
and may be within hearing of , the wardours. 
Four knights below keep castle guard, to 
night, within the great portal, the King 
being here, at Kenilworth. You have, 
perchance, already betrayed yourself; but 
wait here, while I go on and examine, 
whether the way be clear ; if you hear me 
speaking loud, retire into the covered passage, and bar the iron door ; but be not 
heard the while ; if all be still, stay here, 
till I return." 

Woodreeve eagerly desired to follow, 
his heart misgiving him of treachery, and 
because also, that he even shuddered at the 
thought of being left alone in this dreary 
place, without a light ; for the only lamp 
they carried the Prior must take to light 
his own steps. But his conductor objected, that, their way now lying near the 



ground, it was unsafe for them to go further together, till he should have made 
sure, that the wardours were aloof. To 
this the merchant remarked with some 
surprize, that this did not agree with the 
assurance he had given him, that he had 
safe means of escape, for, it now appeared 
that, although their passage lay so near to 
where the wardours, or others watched, 
it seemed not that he had secured the 
good-will of any one to help them. A 
keen sarcastic sm.ile was on the countenance of the Prior, which, certain, the 
poor merchant did not read aright. 

" If you have deceived me already, how 
can I resolve to proceed further with you ? 
you said you had prepared a horse and 
guide, without the walls." 

" Hush, " said the Prior, " you are delivering us both to destruction ; speak not ; 
be confident and patient ; you will soon 
have reason to find that your distrust has 
been folly. I will return immediately, un




less I am seen. If you hear my voice, remember the retreat, that remains for you, 
and that you secure the door without 
noise ; I shall find means of extricating you 
another way. You know you are not to 
expect me to call to you ; it will be sufficient if you hear me speaking loudly." 

Having said this, he laid his finger on 
his lips, and then, shading the lamp by his 
garment, left the chamber by a narrow 
passage, and was speedily out of sight. 
Woodreeve, awed by the darkness of this 
lone spot, tried, notwithstanding the injunction he had received, to follow his steps ; 
but no sound of them could he hear ; a 
little ray from the lamp alone giving liim 
a faint glimpse through that passage into 
a lofty chamber, where he just discovered 
the light vanishing through a distant doorway, with the Prior's shadow beside it. 
And here Woodreeve made halt, lest 
he should not be able, in this darkness, to 

 





find his way back to the covered passage, 
should the signal for retreat be sounded, 
and lest his following steps should be heard 
of the Prior, who his- self moved so stilly, 
as though he had meant to observe whether he was followed, or not. 

The merchant listened attentively, but 
heard no sound : he watched a considerable while on this spot, without perceiving 
any sign of the Prior's return. His heart 
again failed him, and again he trusted, that 
he, who was guiltless of any crime, and 
whom pity for a murdered kinsman had 
exposed to this danger, would not be left 
to be destroyed by any artifice of man. 
Still the Prior did not return, nor was his 
voice heard in any direction. Now, taking 
his way towards the door, through which 
he had seen him depart, he determined to 
know the worst, and either to make one 
desperate effort to escape, or resign himself into the hands of any guard he could 



find. The chamber was so spacious, that 
hardly could he find his way through it, 
but that, as he advanced, he perceived a 
glimmering of light, which led him to 
the very door, where his conductor had 
disappeared. Here he saw the rays shoot 
athwart another room, through the arch of 
an opposite door. Listening and hearing 
no sound, he advanced cautiously, that he 
might observe, without entering that further chamber, what was passing within it. 
It was a large and lofty chamber, having 
no window, save one, but many loops in 
the walls, which were dimly seen by the 
slanting light from a lamp near the high 
roof. On the opposite side, were large 
grooves and pullies of extraordinary 
strength, such as he had never seen before, 
and could not now comprehend the use 
of; but, in the present temper of his mind, 
he readily assigned for them some terrible purpose ; in which conjecture he was 
 



 


 



not mistaken. Near them were a row of 
large iron spikes and many bars, that 
covered the wall to a great height; and 
he then understood this to be the port-cullis 
room. But what surprized him was, to 
see light springing up through the floor, 
at regular distances, by small apertures ; 
for, he knew not that there were used the 
machicollations, for pouring down melted 
lead and hot sand on the heads of enemies, 
who might have forced the first gates, or 
even the port»cuUis itself; and that this 
glimmering came from the watch-lights 
of the guard in the portal beneath. Still, 
he neither saw, nor heard, any living person in this chamber ; till, venturing a httle 
within the door, he observed, at the farther 
end, a torch, gleaming through a passage, 
and the Prior himself standing in the archway, between two men, who lay along on 
stone benches in the wall. 

He bent over one for awhile, and then 
over the other, as if communicating some




thing to them ; and Woodreeve, suspecting that he was betrayed to those, who 
would not scruple to dispatch him, stood 
rooted by terror to the spot, and saw the 
Prior ad Nuance alone towards the door, 
where he watched. He was presently observed of him, and the looks of his conductor, on discovering him, seemed to express dismay ; but this soon passed from 
them, and, putting himself back, within 
the door, he said, " All is right ; follow me 
through that passage ; but step lightly and 
speak not, for your life." 

" For my life," answered the merchant, 
imprudently, " will I not follow you thither, where two men are lying in wait ; T 
have seen them." 

" Then you have seen the wardours of 
this cullis-chamber in their niches, keeping 
guard ; and good guard will they keep ; 
they will not wake of one while; their 
liquor has been such as I wished." 

This seemed so probable an explanation, 





that Woodreeve received it for truth; yet 
was he surprized, that so great preparation had been made for his escape, and 
he asked how it were possible to be certain this sleep was not feigned, and who 
had prepared their drink. The Prior 
answered, with sarcastic smile, " Four 
knights do service in the portal below ; 
there is one among them, who has spared 
not to make these inferior wardours 
merry." 

He then checked further question, saying, " Come, let us pass ; time speeds ; this 
moment we may use, the next, perhaps, 
we may not." Without more words, the 
merchant followed him through the portculhs-chamber, and, drawing nigh the 
place of guard, did, in trowth, perceive 
the two wardours fast asleep in the niches, 
where they usually kept watch. But, 
hardly had he entered the gate-way, when 
one of them began to move himself on 

 

the bench, and cried out, " Down with 
the port-cullis, they are coming over the 
bridge;" and, stretching forth his arm, 
he had nigh knocked the lamp from the 
Priors hand, and the merchant, as he 
passed, was touched. 

They stayed not to see whether he had 
waked himself, but, turning into a little 
projection of the passage, went down a 
round stair. And now approached the 
greatest danger of discovery ; for, this led 
down into a room that opened under the 
great portal, where the wardours of that 
place usually sat. There were stone seats 
within the wall appointed for them, where 
they watched out the night in all seasons, 
save of the bleakest weather of winter, 
and then they sat by fire in the guardchamber, which was in the opposite tower 
opening under the gate-way. But those, 
who, this night, kept castle-guard under 
the great portal, being there on knight's 





service and unused, save for a certain 
season, to be from their beds, at this time, 
minded not to watch within the niches ; 
and, the draw-bridge being securely up, 
they sat in that guard-room, there beguiling the time with dice, or they contented 
themselves with now and then a turn 
under the great arch, to see that others 
did their duty ; and then reposed themselves. 

When the merchant saw whither that 
stair led, he asked how they were to pass, 
unseen, through the portal, where the wardours watched, and received for answer, they 
were not to go out to that portal, secured 
by gates, as well as by guards and by the 
raised draw-bridge, but by a secret way 
in the tower-room below. Now, hardly 
had the Prior spoken, when, on coming 
near to the bottom stair, he checked his 
steps, and stood still and watchful; for, 
he saw the door of that room standing 





ajar, which he had reason to hope would 
have been shut and even fastened at this 
hour ; and, presently after, a wardour was 
seen passing there, by a light hanging in 
the arch-way. 

Darkening his lamp with his garment, 
he stood, fearing to venture forward, lest 
his steps should discover him, ere he could 
get through that room. He also feared, 
that the noise of raising the trap, by which 
he would depart, must be heard, even if 
he should get safely through the room. 
Before the passing of many minutes, the 
Knight, watching there, began to sing an 
old Norman song, the burden of which 
was taken up in chorus by his comrades 
dicing in the guard-room beyond, making 
a kind of hoarse music, which was soon 
joined by the sound of a single clarion, repeating a few notes in an under tone, both 
solemn and terrific to the poor merchant, 
who thought it was some signal of alarm. 
 




But his conductor, who knew it to be 
only a sign for changing the guard at 
some post without the gates, took courage 
at the noise, and, boldly stepping forward, 
shut the door that led to the portal, and 
drew the gate within. Yet, ere he could 
find the trap, the Knight, who had heard 
a bolt drawn, was calling and then striking heavily at the door. Finding no 
answer, he ordered a clarion to be sounded in the portal for a call to the wardours, 
of the port-cullis chamber above, and to 
gather those below to inquire into this 
matter. 

And now was Woodreeve most fearful, 
lest those sleeping wardours above should 
by these loud soundings be roused from 
their trance : and hardly could he hold 
the lamp to the ground, while the Prior 
searched for the trap, which lay hid in the 
comer ; there, having found a grated opening on the floor, Woodreeve pointed that 





out for the trap, little guessing he stood 
over the Castle dungeon, where condemned criminals were kept, and where he might 
yet be laid. It was of great depth, and 
what little and glimmering light it ever 
had was received through this opening, 
by which also food was let down to the 
wretched prisoner. 

Undismayed by the noise without, now 
that he had secured the door, the Prior 
continued to search coolly for the trap, 
knowing, perchance, better than his companion, that the wardours would not soon 
wake, and that amongst the knights below, 
was one, who was enough the friend of the 
Baron de Blonde ville and his cause to 
manage his unthinking comrades, till they 
should be willing to suppose the alarm had 
proceeded from some mistaken cause. 
Had the merchant been also aware of this, 
he might have thought himself safe ; yet 
might he have erred, when thus secure. 





and have found that his worst enemy 
stood close beside him. 
 The Prior having, at length, found the 
trap, applied the key, and, with his companion's aid, lifted the door. Beneath, appeared a steep and narrow stair, and now 
again, when Woodreeve, after such long 
toil and so many changes of anxiety, looked down into this dark abyss, his distrust 
of his companion returned with new force ; 
he pointed to the fearful descent, and 
urged, that, even if it could lead them without the walls, they must be unable to get 
over the foss, which was broad and full of 
deep water. A thundering sound upon 
the portal door and a loud blast of the 
clarion silenced this remonstrance, and prevented the Prior's reply. He thought the 
sleep of the wardours above must needs 
be the sleep of death, if it fled not at the 
noise : so thought some under the archway. 





and they redoubled their blows and their 
hallooings ; but as yet to no purpose. 

The Prior the while, having found it no 
very difficult matter to thrust, as it were, 
bis harassed companion down the opening, 
lowered and secured the trap and followed down the steps. As Woodreeve now 
stood with the lamp, at the bottom of them, 
the light it cast upward to the Prior gave 
a ghastly hue to his visage, which again 
brought back his former faint recollection 
of having seen him, at some other period, 
and under circumstances of danger. It 
was by such an upward, darting hght, that 
he had seen the murderer of his kinsman, 
at the moment when the visor fell off; and 
he now almost thought he saw before him 
that very murderer. 

The suspicion was far from being strong, 
but the mixed expression of terror and 
firmness, with which he fixed his eyes upon him, did not escape the Prior. With 





less firmness than usual, he almost started 
and threw a keen and frowning glance 
upon his companion. Dark and thronging 
thoughts cast their shadows upon his countenance. But recovering, by degrees, his 
usual aspect, he stood awhile at the foot of 
the stair, listening for the sound above. 
It had ceased, and all within and without 
this gloomy vault, was still. 

He knew not, whether to understand, 
that the noise had brought down the wardours from their sleep, and that the portal 
was opened, or that the Baron's friend, 
who watched there with the rest, had succeeded in quieting their suspicions. The 
thickness of the trap, and the depth of the 
vault, in which he stood, would prevent 
him from hearing their footsteps, even if 
they were • trampling over his head; but 
should this be so, and should those knights, 
who were strangers to the secret ways of 
the castle, have discovered the trap -door, 





he trusted to the strength of its inward 
fastenings for a sufficient time of security, 
Woodreeve stood, the while, silent from 
terror and expectation, and hardly did he 
know whether it were better for him to be 
overtaken by those above, or to proceed 
with his murky conductor. " What, if he 
has brought me into the depth of this 
vault only to destroy me?" thought he. 
Then he considered, that hardly would 
any one, after the alarm which had been 
given above, hazard himself by so atrocious a deed, and his spirits, in some 
deal, returned. 

But he demanded again, and with more 
resolute tone, whither they were going, 
and was answered, " To a sally-port." 

But how are we to pass the ditch ? Is 
there a boat then waiting for us ? " 

" Come on," answered the Poor, 
sharply. 

Woodreeve followed, without further 





question, yet misliked he the manner of 
his conductor more than ever. Nor had 
he failed to observe, that, unless at intervals, when reproof was to be conveyed, or 
hope raised, no eyes met his, so bent were 
those of the Prior towards the ground. 
They passed on through other vaults, and, 
whether it were the bad air there, or apprehension of what might follow. Woodreeve felt himself so faint, that hardly 
could he drag his steps along. Soon they 
came to a round chamber, whose roof, supported by a central pillar, rose in vaultings, 
that terminated in corbeils of lions' heads, 
upon a cornice of noble simplicity. The 
place seemed intended for a hall of some 
sort, but the merchant, who looked round 
it with surprise, could perceive no windows ; there were two arched doors opposite to each other, and to one of these the 
Prior led. Having gone up a few steps, 
he undrew the strong fastenings, and un




closed it, Woodreeve hastily following him, 
for he once more felt the fresh air breathe 
upon his face. His conductor pressed forward, but suddenly checked himself, and 
drew back ; he had nearly fallen into the 
foss below. 

 I have mistaken the way," said he, 
this is a sally-port long disused, and the 
steps from it are removed." 

He had in trowth mistaken this for a 
sally-port, that had led under the rampart, 
and the castle ditch ; but, this entrance 
having been considered as an inlet dangerous in times of siege, the steps had been 
taken down, and the door strongly secured. 
For the hall, it had once been a principal 
entrance to a tower on the walls, although 
it lay under a lofty flight of covered 
steps, that led obliquely to a larger portal, 
guarded by strong doors, one of which was 
of iron. 

Woodreeve, breathing awhile the fresh 





air from without, recovered strength and 
courage ; he almost blamed himself for his 
want of patience, and for having failed to 
allow, that an escape from a castle so spacious as this of Kenilworth, and so fully 
occupied and inhabited, as it now was, 
could not be made, except by many devious and tedious ways. But he did not 
long enjoy this free air ; the Prior suddenly closed the door, made the bars fast, 
and then, turning away, began to examine 
the wall, at a little distance, where he applied a key to a door, not seen till the 
lamp was held close to it ; thence a steep 
stair descended, as if into another vault. 
They stepped upon it, and the Prior bade 
Woodreeve go first, while he locked the 
door ; but here again distrust returned to 
the still baffled prisoner, for he perceived 
that this door was greatly different from 
that of the sally-port ; so much so that 
he marvelled how one could be mis




taken for the other ; and he stopped, fearful of what might follow. 

Yet had no apparent purpose been answered if the error were wilfid ; and, if 
the Prior had an ill-meaning, so far as to 
intend him bodily harm, in their lonely 
track, he seemed to have missed an opportunity fitted for his purpose, since it would 
have been easy to push him into the dark 
moat below. This thought encouraged 
him now to proceed: but he would not 
have been so soon consoled, had he known 
as much as his conductor knew. He 
asked, however, whither this second flight 
would lead them, and was answered, " Beyond the walls, where you shall soon find 
yourself at liberty ; if you like not to proceed, return and deliver yourself up to 
justice." 

The merchant followed down a very 
long flight of steps, ending in a passage, 
which he supposed lay under the foss. 





Here the air was so changed by an unwholesome vapour, that it was painful to 
breathe it ; and the lamp burned so dimly, 
at times, that he feared it would expire. 
The Prior often stopped to nurse the 
flame, and once, as he lifted the lamp 
high, and it revived, his garment flew 
back, and Woodreeve now saw, beyond all 
possibility of doubt, a dagger at his girdle. 

His eyes were fixed upon it, till his 
conductor saw that he observed it ; and 
then, laying his hand upon the hilt, he 
said, " In times like these, every one 
should be somewhat armed.' 

But now another object had seized the 
attention of the merchant, and he stood in 
horror. In drawing forth the dagger, his 
companion had turned aside his vesture, 
and, behold ! a chain of gold hung about 
his neck, which from its ponderous but 
highly wrought ornaments, Woodreeve in




stantly thought was the very chain worn 
by his kinsman, at the time of his death, 
and he doubted not, that in the Prior he 
saw one of his assassins. A sort of amulet box was suspended to the chain, but of 
that he had no recollection. 

At this conviction, he lost all presence 
of mind, so that he foresaw not how much 
he might hasten his peril, and lessen his 
chance, if there were any, of finally avoiding it, in betraying his thoughts to the 
Prior, whose revenge might be accomphshed in such a place, without danger, as it 
appeared, from any human means of discovery. 

He seized the lamp, and, holding it 
close to the chain, cried out, " It is the 
same — there are the very links, that shape 
— the initials of his name." 

" Of whose name?" said the Prior eagerly, and as he spoke, Woodreeve recollect




ed the voice of the very robber, to whom 
he had delivered up his own treasure. 
The Prior, still without having changed 
his voice, repeated the question. 

" Of my unfortunate kinsman," answered Woodreeve ; ' I now know you." 

Instantly, the discovered ruffian, without one word, drew the dagger from the 
imperfect grasp, which Woodreeve had of 
it ; and upraised his hand with a fierce 
and deadly intention, but the blow descended not ; the poignard fell from his 
hand, and his eyes seemed fixed upon 
some object beyond. 

The poor merchant, who, for an instant, 
had been motionless and confounded with 
terror, seeing this, gathered courage, and 
turned to discover what held his enemy in 
this trance ; but nothing could he perceive, save the dusky avenue. Then, losing not another moment, he fled, with the 





lamp, along that unknown way ; but he 
had neglected to seize the dagger, which 
had fallen on the ground, and might easily 
have been made a weapon for himself. 

He followed the avenue, till his breath 
failed, and he was compelled to stop ; but, 
soon thinking he heard steps behind him, 
he again went on, and, flying for very life, 
hope and fear supplied him with strength. 
He had now gone a great length of way, 
without having discovered any thing like 
an outlet, and he rested again for breath, 
and to revive his failing lamp. He listened, and, though he heard no footsteps in 
pursuit, he remembered the soundless 
steps, with which his treacherous conductor had, this night, passed along several 
chambers, and he was not convinced, that 
he was distant, though unheard. The intenseness, with which he listened for anyremote, or lone sound, seemed to sharpen 



 

his sense of hearing, like as the seaman's 
sight discovers things so small and distant, 
as are unseen of others. 

Thus, now while Woodreeve listened, 
he thought he heard — not footsteps, but, 
a little strain of music so faint and fleeting it was more like the moonlight shadow of a fleecy cloud, that glides along the 
hills, and fades ere you can say it is, than 
any certain truth. It served, hoAvever, at 
first, to revive his hopes ; he judged it 
came from without the castle walls ; but 
then perhaps, from soldiers on their watch, 
and, if so, his deliverance could not be nigh. 
Still, as his only hope lay that way, he 
hastened forward, and presently he again 
thought he heard music. He stopped and 
no longer doubted this ; the sound was 
nearer, and he gradually distinguished a 
faint, solemn swell of voices and instruments. As he advanced, they sunk and 
were lost awhile ; and then a high and 





long continued strain of many mingling 
voices was heard. Soon after, it sunk 
away, at a distance, and he heard it no 
more. 

But now he fancied steps were coming 
behind him, and, quickening his own, he 
came to a bend of the avenue, and espied 
a door, which seemed to close its dreary 
length. Three massive bars secured it, 
but there was also a lock. While lie 
stood before it, and looked back on the 
long sloping avenue, almost as far as his 
lifted lamp could throw its blunted rays, 
he heard no sound of either step, or breath, 
from within, or from without that door ; 
nor saw the Prior advancing through that 
dim way behind him. 

The bolts gave way to Woodreeve's returned strength, and even the lock did 
not long resist. Already, he thought he 
felt the fresh air fi'om without the castle 
walls ; but, opening the door, he stepped 

 





not out upon a platform of grass, or under 
the boughs of the free forest ; he stepped 
upon a little winding stair, that went up 
a turret, as he verily believed, of another 
tower, some out-post of the castle. At 
this, his heart sunk nigh to fainting ; for 
how should he escape detection from those, 
who guarded it, and whose voices he now 
thought he heard singing, in dreary chorus, on their night-watch. 

Having considered, a moment, to little 
purpose, for he had no choice but to go 
on, he went up the stair, and came to another door. He listened for awhile, but all 
within was still, and he undrew the bolt 
that held it, and wovild have stepped forward, but was baffled by what he thought 
a curtain, that hung before it. In this he 
deceived himself. It was the tapestry of 
a chamber. Perceiving this, he stopped 
again, before he lifted it, to consider how 
best he might disclose himself, if any one 





were within ; but, all being silent, he ventured to lift the arras, and found himself in a great arched chamber. A lamp 
was burning near a reading-desk ; but no 
person appeared, and he looked round, 
with a mixture of terror and curiosity, 
still holding up the arras, wdth one hand, 
and with the other his lamp, to survey the 
limits of the room ; and he still kept one 
foot on the threshold-step, as ready to retreat, on the first alarm. 

At length, perceiving that he was indeed alone in this chamber, he let the 
hangings drop, and ventured forward, in 
search of an outlet, through which to escape ; but he saw none. The walls were 
covered with tapestry, which concealed 
whatsoever doors might be within them, 
and presented in colours various good 
deeds. A large oriel-window of fretted 
stone-work rose in sharp arches, closed 
with glass, stained in a mosaic of divers 
 





rich colours, like unto those in the great 
church of the city of Cologne in Germany. 
This window showed also the emblazoned 
arms of Geoffrey de Clinton, with many a 
golden rule in scrowl-work and labels on 
the glass. 

All this Woodreeve espied, while, with 
his lamp in hand, he searched around for 
some outlet, to depart by. It seemeth not 
expedient to set down here all the objects 
he saw in this chamber ; suffice it to say 
it was an oratory, and the histories on the 
tapestry and all the garniture were such 
as are meet for such a place. On a table 
lay divers folios well bossed with silver ; 
among them was Matthew of Westminster 
and the Golden Legend. An arm-chair, 
with purple cushions, stood by the reading-desk, on which lay open a copy of the 
venerable Bede, and a Missal beside it, 
freshly illuminated. 

At all he saw his mind misgave him. 





that this was some chamber, not of the 
castle, but of the Priory ; and, if so, whither could he turn, to flee from destruction. His eye again glancing round the 
walls, he observed a part of the tapestry 
inclosed in a kind of frame- work, different 
from any other part of the arras ; and, 
hoping there might be a door behind this, 
he was advancing towards it, when he 
heard a rustling sound in another part of 
the chamber ; and, turning, beheld the 
arras lifted, and the Prior himself standing in the same arch, through which he 
had entered. 

His countenance was livid and malicious, and he held in his hand the dagger 
he had dropped in the avenue. 

Hardly did Wood reeve cast a look 
behind him ; but, rushing towards that 
frame-work, he found it held a door, which 
opened upon a vaulted passage of the 
Priory, ending in a cloister. As he fled, 


 

he turned to see whether his pursuer advanced, and observed him standing at the 
great door of the chamber, making sign 
for his return ; as if, after having let that 
dagger and that murderer's look be seen, 
it were possible to lure him back again. 

It was Woodreeve's aim, should he be 
unable to get out of the monastery, to 
take refuge at the altar ; and, with this 
intent, he proceeded hastily along the 
cloister which opened, as he expected, 
into the chapel ; and thence he soon heard 
the sound of voices and instruments ; for 
the monks were now chanting the last 
matin, and he recollected the strain he 
had heard in the avenue. But, ere he 
could reach sanctuary, the Prior's steps 
were heard, along the cloister, and his 
voice calling loudly for help, and saying 
his life was in danger from a prisoner 
escaped of the castle ; and, commanding, 
that they should stop him, ere he reached 








shelter. The monks, engaged as they 
were, at this hour, in service, heard not 
the alarm ; till a lay brother, coming forth 
of the dormitory, raised a cry, which 
brought out from their cells a few sick brothers, who now joined in the cry, which 
those at matins presently heard. 

Woodreeve, however, pursued his course; 
and, opening a folding-door at the end of 
the cloister, found himself in the chancel, 
and gained the sanctuary, ere his pursuers reached him, or the amazed brethren 
there could understand they were to stop 
his way. 

By this time the service had ceased, 
and all was confusion ; the Prior pressing 
forward to seize the poor merchant, even 
at the altar-steps ; and the monks flocking round him, to prevent sacrilege, and 
to learn the motive for his attempting 
to commit it. Scarcely was he kept back 
by the monks from offering violence to 





Woodreeve, who was still breathless and 
fainting, from the thought of peril so 
hardly escaped, though he turned, and in 
some sort, faced his enemy. 

But, before he was calm enough to 
speak, the Prior began his say : he asserted, that, while he was sitting in the 
great chamber, studying, a secret door of 
the room opened, and he saw this stranger 
enter. He knew him to be the man imprisoned in the castle, for having falsely 
accused the Baron de Blondeville, and 
whose trial for unlawful arts of magic, 
designed to delude the eyes and minds of 
the whole court, by a false presentment 
of the crime imputed to the Baron, and 
thereby to prejudice the King against him, 
to his utter ruin, was shortly to come on 
in the castle-hall. How he had escaped 
from prison he knew not, nor how he had 
reached the Priory ; where, perchance, he 
had come undesignedly. On perceiving 





him quietly sitting at his reading-desk, the 
prisoner, possessed either by despair, or 
by desire of vengeance, for the part he 
had taken against him in the King's presence, drew forth a dagger ; and, having 
vainly made a blow at him, fled, as they 
had witnessed : " And here behold the instrument of his intended crime," said the 
Prior, " turned aside from my breast by 
my own hand. I found it on the floor of 
my chamber." And he held up the poinard. 

Astonished and confounded by these audacious falsehoods, Woodreeve stood aghast, 
and his very looks would have condemned 
him, with the greater part of the brotherhood, could they even have questioned 
the truth of their Prior ; v»-ho, hovvever, 
was httle loved amongst thcni. With one 
voice they cried out against the stranger, 
so that he almost gave himself up for 
lost ; but, when his enemy said, that no 






place ought to protect such a criminal, 
they all at once stood up against violation 
of sanctuary, as became them ; and marvelled, that he showed so little reverence 
for so high a privilege. Then the Prior, 
forgetful of what became his office, said 
that his life was yet in danger, unless the 
prisoner could be dislodged from the monastery ; for, although the law of sanctuary could protect him, it could not 
restrain him ; and, as the doors of the 
church could not be locked, he might 
come forth, at some convenient hour ; and 
not only escape from the monastery, but, 
on his way, accomplish the very crime he 
had meditated. 

The monks made answer, that the doors 
of the church should be watched, but 
that they never could consent to afford a 
precedent for violation of sanctuary ; and 
much they were astonished, that their 
superior his-self, who ought to be the first 




to maintain this right, should wish to renounce it. But they excused hiin, seeing 
his terror of the evdl he had just escaped. 
Then, the Prior perceiving he was betiying his own cause, and turning those 
against it, of whose good-will he should 
hereafter have much need, gave up that 
point, but threatened sentence of exclusion 
against any one of the community, who 
should relieve the stranger's hunger. And 
thus was he nearly condemned to a lingering death more miserable than any, 
which the common law of the land could 
have pronounced against him, since it was 
improbable, that any of the villagers should 
venture to brave the anger of the Prior. 

Adversity had now well nigh persuaded 
Woodreeve, that, however just his cause, 
it would avail him nothing, where the criminal had such powerful support ; and 
he forbore, at this time, to increase his 
difficulties, by accusing the Prior as an 





accomplice of the Baron de Blondeville. 
He spoke only to make a solemn denial 
of the charge against himself, adding, that, 
if the brethren would send to the castle 
for a guard, he would instantly relinquish 
the privilege of sanctuary, and deliver 
himself up to the King's officers, but to 
no other. This pleased not his enemy, 
who dreaded the tale he might unfold ; 
and, however strange that might ai)pear 
and hard to be believed, he knew, that in 
those lawless times, there had been instances of rapine, committed by wicked 
intruders like himself into the fold, and, 
therefore might some parts of the history 
be not wholly discredited ; the more especially as the Lord Archbishop seemed 
to be not wholly his friend. So, he resolved to take his cause into his own 
hands, and to attempt that by poison, 
which he had failed to perpetrate by steel, 
when the merchant, as has been related. 




had imprudently made a charge against 
him in so lonely a place. 

For, it is not to be guessed, that the 
Prior, in leading him forth from prison, 
had, at first, any other motive than to 
turn hiiif loose and let him make his way 
to a distant part of the country, where he 
would be so well contented by having 
saved his life, as never again to hazard 
it, by endangering that of the Baron. 
However this might be, he now, in his 
folly and wickedness, as wickedness leads 
on to wickedness, and blinds its followers, 
judged it necessary for his own life, that 
the merchant should perish, and that, 
before he could have an opportimity of 
communicating with the King's officers. 
But to accomplish this it would be necessary to practise somewhat of the cunning 
dexterity, which with him supplied the 
place of wisdom, and which he was well 
content to mistake for it. 




He, therefore, feigned to relax somewhat of his severity ; and, saying the 
mminal should be allowed bread and 
water, while he remained in sanctuary, 
was so departing. But Woodreeve, now 
remembering the golden chain, worn by 
the Prior, and considering how helping 
it must be to his own cause to have that 
matter known, which might never he, if 
not now, wished to devise some means 
of making him show it to the brethren, 
before he had taken the precaution of 
laying it aside, if indeed he had not 
already done so. Yet, to mention this 
chain, without putting him on his guard 
to conceal it, were not possible. That 
was however done for him, which he had 
not the art to compass. 

When the Prior was departing from 
the Church, Woodreeve, again appealing 
to the brethren, bade them bear witness, that he utterly and solemnly denied 





all attempt or intention, to commit the 
crime now alleged against him, and that 
he could, at a proper time and place, unravel the mystery of his appearance there ; 
" Look at me, who am scarcely of middle 
age," said he, " and at the Prior, who, 
though large, is past his prime, and say, 
whether, if I had attempted his hfe, liis 
arm alone could have withstood me." 

" I say not, that I escaped by my own 
strength," replied the Prior, " I wear a 
charm, which protects me against evil 
sprites, whether instigating human beings, 
or acting as shadows." 

" If so," said Woodreeve, " why do you 
fear me, that you, but now, refused to 
grant me sanctuary, lest I should step 
forth from this place, and aim at your 
life. It cannot be credited ; you have no 
such charm." 

" You are a deceiver," said the Prior ; 
" here is your falsehood proved," and he 





drew forth the amulet, suspended by the 
chain, but, in an instant, withdrew it, perceiving whither fear and anger were leading him. On seeing again this memorial 
of his dead kinsman, Woodreeve was so 
much disturbed, that he had almost slipped off the place of sanctuary, as he reached towards it. 

But, checking his steps, he cried out, 
" Wretch, whence had you that chain ? 
Would it had been annexed to any real 
charm of defence, when my poor kinsman 
wore it in the forest of Ardenn ! He 
would now, perchance, be alive to claim 
it. 

The brethren looked on Woodreeve, 
with surprize and displeasvu'e, Avhile no 
one, save the Prior, understood fully those 
words ; and his countenance, nathless all 
his art and boldness, fell when he heard 
them. " Venerable brethren," continued 


 

the merchant, " mark well that chain ; for 
hereafter it may unfold a tale which ye 
guess not off." 

Upon this so pressing a call, they 
thronged round their superior, entreating, 
indeed, to see the amulet, but wishing 
chiefly to see the chain attached to it ; 
and the Prior, who saw their motive beneath their pretence, was aware, that he 
could not resist them, without giving irremediable strength to their suspicions. 

As they looked on it, Woodreeve said, 
" You will observe, above what he calls a 
charm, three golden letters, being part of 
the chain itself, and also three jewels, the 
middle one of great value ; the others are 
rubies." 

The monks then ventured to examine it 
further, and found it was as he said. 

" In the clasp of that chain," said the 
merchant, " is a painting, the hkeness of 
a noble lady, my unfortunate kinsman's 



wife ; it was drawn by a Florentine, a fa 
mous illuminator." 

" We see nothing of that," answered 
the brethren. There is no such thing." 

While the Prior now exclaimed eagerly, 
" Mark his falsehood." 

But AVoodreeve, addressing himself to 
the brethren, told them there was a secret 
spring ; and, instructing them how to find 
it, said they would then behold a fair and 
unhappy lady. They did as he directed, 
when, a golden plate of that noble clasp 
flying up, they beheld, not the portrait of 
a lady, but that of a knight in armour, 
whose look was mild and full of thoughtful sadness. On seeing this, they cried, 
that he knew not the chain ; for that it 
showed only the semblance of a knight. 
Hearing this, the merchant stretched forth 
his hand impatiently, and descended two 
steps of the sanctuary to examine the portrait, ere he well knew what he was doing. 





Then he entreated them, that they would 
allow him to see it ; for, it was surely the 
likeness of his deceased fi'iend ; but they 
all assented to the Prior, that it must not 
be so entrusted. 

At last, however, two of them yielded 
so far to his loud and earnest entreaties, 
that they held up to him the picture, beyond his reach, but where he could yet distinguish the features by the strong Hght of 
the tapers. On viewing that well-known 
countenance, tears stood in his eyes, and 
his looks alone might have convinced 
many, he had indeed spoken the truth, 
touching that chain, though he his-self was 
amazed by the portrait, having never seen 
it before. The Prior failed not to make 
his advantage of this unexpected circumstance ; but, while he was yet triumphing, 
the merchant bade the brethren press once 
more that golden plate, as he directed, 
when a Ud on the reverse side opened, and 





behold ! a lady's countenance, meek and 
fair, with lifted eyes, and like unto some 
blessed saint. 

They all at once exclaimed, " it is here," 
and passed the chain from one to another, 
some looking with wondrous dread, upon 
the prisoner, and some again on the Prior, 
who stood darkly watching, and they cried 
out,  How may this be !" 

Then the Prior, with looks of derision, 
said, " Can ye ask that question, knowing 
as ye do, that the man before ye is about 
to be tried in the King's Court for practice 
of unlawful magic ? It avails not, that he 
has been prevented from touching that 
chain with his hand ; he has exercised a 
stranger power upon it, than if he had 
touched it. Those paintings were not 
there before ; the chain has long been mine, 
as most of ye know. I bought it, before I 
was of this house." 

" And thus it may well be," said one of 





the monks, " for this is not so marvellous, 
as those delusions conjured up in the castlehall.'' And they blessed themselves and 
delivered up the chain to the Prior, who 
received it, with secret triumph. 

" You now behold the charm which has 
preserved my life from the attempt of that 
ruffian," said he, pointing to Woodreeve ; 
" and will no more doubt, why his strength 
failed, when he assailed me." 

Too late, the prisoner then perceived, that, 
in compelling his enemy to produce this 
chain, he had brought out an argument 
against himself. The monks had not refused their assent to their Prior's assertion ; 
and, if there were any amongst them, who 
compared what he had asserted of the protecting virtues of this charm, against the 
malice of the poor merchant, with what he 
now said of the magical influence of the 
man upon this very chain, even while it 
was in his own hands, they did not dare to 





point forth the contradiction. The Prior, 
still dreading lest the prisoner should throw 
himself into the hands of the King's guard, 
as he had offered, now determined, in order to deter him from so doing, to make 
further use of his over-sight ; and, holding 
up the chain, he called out, " When you 
shall have surrendered yourself up to justice, here is an evidence, that shall convict 
you of unlawful arts, if others fail. This 
picture, which you have conveyed hither 
by secret magic, shall be more than a living 
witness against you." 

The latter words of the Prior were resoundedj it might be by an echo of the 
aisles : " more than a living witness against 
you." 

The brethren looked round, and Woodreeve listened. There were some among 
them, who fancied they heard a moaning 
from the ground underneath, between them 
and the north wall ; others took it for the 
wind murmuring in the vaults near ; but 





none of them spoke his thoughts. It 
might be the hollow blast, that sounds, at 
fits, before a tempest ; for a storm came, 
soon after, which shook the walls. However this might be, Woodreve shuddered 
often as he heard it ; and, looking round 
him, recollections rushed suddenly on his 
mind, that filled it with dismay. He examined eagerly the spot he stood on, and 
found, that he had indeed taken sanctuary 
near the grave of his unfortunate kinsman, 
though no name now appeared on it. 

On this discovery, the blood rushed back 
to his heart, and he was nigh to falling into the like convulsions he had suffered under, when first he saw the Baron de Blondeville, beside the King. On recovering, 
he knelt down on the grave, raising his 
hands and eyes, and so continued, for 
some time. Then, rising and turning to 
the Prior, who seemed little affected by 
any thing that had passed, he calmly said. 





that he was willing to deliver himself up 
to the King's officers, soon as they could be 
brought hither. To this the Prior answered he would send early on the morrow ; 
but, as not even the PCing's officers might 
enter that place of sanctuary, to take him 
thence, he must come forth of himself, ere 
he could surrender to them. Woodreeve, 
fearing treachery on the way, liked not 
this ; and so the Prior had foreseen, who 
for his own purposes, further said, that the 
officers should wait for him, at the outer 
gate of the Priory, that so all the world 
miffht bear witness the church had not 
betrayed him to the secular power. 

" And, when the world shall bear witness, that my surrender is voluntary," said 
Woodreeve, in order to daunt the Prior 
from his purpose ; " then will it judge me 
innocent by that act alone." 

So resolute a reply convinced his enemy 
he had no time to lose in effecting what




ever wrong he might intend to perpetrate, 
in pursuance of his wretched policy ; and 
he now departed, meditating on the means 
of accomplishing it. 

Leaving a guard of monks behind at 
the entrance of the chancel, he gave sign 
to Wischard, a brother, whom he had long 
favoured, to follow him to the great chamber. How to compass the death of the prisoner, in so short a space by any poison, 
that should not betray itself, and bring 
suspicion on its inventor, he knew not. 
Sometimes, he thought it were better to 
give him his liberty to flee away ; and so 
he would have done, could he have been 
certain the liberty would be so used ; but 
he was rather certain, from what had 
lately passed, that this would be otherwise ; that the prisoner would urge his 
offer of an escape, as evidence against 
him, on a charge of having been an ac
 



 

complice in the murder ; and that other 
things might come to light, which would 
be more easily proved than the guilt of 
the Baron alone. 

With these doubts and fears upon his 
mind, he remained in the arched chamber, 
in close consultation with Wischard, till 
all in the Priory were at rest, save the 
poor merchant on his kinsman's grave, 
and those monks who watched him there. 



THE SIXTH DAY. 



 



THE SIXTH DAY. 

At the head of this chapter was an illuminated 
drawing of the inside of the White Hall„ with the 
King's court assembled. The King was in a chair, 
but without a cloth of estate over it ; and near him 
was his high Justicier, who sat on the same platform, in his robes of office. On the steps, near the 
King's chair, stood a youth, with an observing countenance, intended, no doubt, for Prince Edward ; 
also at the footstool knelt a young man, with a 
spirited air, offering a chain to the King, who 
seemed to gaze on him, with amazement and terror. 
Throughout the hall appeared general consternation ; many of the Bishops and Barons stood up, and 
leaned forward, as if to view what was passing near 
the King's chair. 



THE SIXTH DAY. 



Early on the morrow, the Prior of 
Saint Mary's was at the Castle, in close 
conference with the Baron de Blondeville, 
and awaiting a hearing of the King. 
And, when they had obtained this, having 
already settled their plot, they set forth, in 
their own way, so much of the adventure 
of the night before at the Priory, as they 
thought necessary to win the King's consent, that the trial of the merchant should 
be had, on this very day. His Highness 
had designed to defer it awhile, both because the argument of the Archbishop had 
taken some hold of him, and because he 




thought it not for the honour of the Baron 
de Blondeville; that this matter should 
seem to be held of such importance as 
that, just at this time, it must be further 
inquired into. 

But now, being sore pressed upon by 
those about him — and it was ever his 
weakness to be ruled by those nearest at 
hand rather than by fixed principles either 
of his own, or of those wiser in council 
than himself — being sore pressed by the 
false representations of the wily Prior, he 
yielded his consent, that the Jury already 
warned should be summoned to attend in 
Court, this day, the trial of the poor stranger for divers practices of magical delusion and of the black art, in the great hall. 
Should they fail to substantiate this head 
of charge, the Prior had another in the tale 
he had already told the King of the merchant's pretended attempt upon his life, 
and his evil practices upon the golden 
chain. 



As matter connected with this charge, 
Jie also told liis Highness, that the merchant had escaped from the Castle to the 
Priory, where he then was and where he 
might be secm'ed; for that he, trusting to his 
own arts, yet unable to elude the vigilance 
of the brethren placed thei'e, had audaciously declared he would resign himself to 
the King's officers, and throw himself upon 
justice. The Prior failed not to point out, 
that there was a daring artfulness in 
this giving out, and to caution his Highness against the seeming consciousness of 
innocence, which it was meant to imply. 
And thus the King seeing, that each day 
brought forth some new danger, plotted, 
as it appeared, by the merchant, against 
the peace and even the lives of his quiet 
subjects, commanded, without further hesitation, that his trial should commence, on 
this very day ; and his Highness determined to be present his-self in Court, the 
while. 



 

The Court had indeed already met in 
the White Hali, and divers small causes 
had been tried there, the preceding day ; 
many other remained to be settled, during 
this time of the King's keeping court, at 
Kenilworth ; but it was resolved, that the 
charge against the merchant should be inqured into immediately on the meeting of 
the court, which was now beginning to assemble. Notice of this was speedily given 
there, and the jury and witnesses, being 
all nigh at hand, were easily brought 
together. 

Meanwhile, a guard was despatched to 
the Priory gate, there to await the surrender of the merchant. Nor was it without 
extreme anxiety and fear, that he, on receiving their summons, stepped from the 
sanctuary, and passed along the passages 
and chambers to the outer gate, where he 
gave himself up to justice, and was soon 
after again a prisoner in the turret. A 





night of watchfulness and terror liad ill 
prepared him for the approaching trial ; 
but he endeavoured to support, with the 
consciousness of innocence and with a recollection of his just motives, the burden of 
calumny and danger now laid upon him, 
and to meet, with calmness, the malice of 
his enemies. 

Nathless, so haggard and wan were his 
looks, when he came before the Court, and 
beheld his chief accuser, the Baron de 
Blondeville, that many there scrupled not 
to say he was guilty even before he was 
tried. And, as ignorance is always a child, 
so were there many nobles then in the 
hall, who, profiting nothing by their years, 
did hold that magic could be wrought by 
such as fully applied themselves unto it, 
and that it had been practised in the 
banquet-hall by this poor stranger, or by 
those in league with him. And, as vanity 
never grows old, but changes its shape 
 





only with the stages of a man's life, so many 
an aged Baron, now sitting in the King's 
court, who, in his youth, had valued himself for a handsome person, gorgeously apparelled, and, in his maturer years, for the 
number of his vassals and the abundance 
of his castle-banquets — many such a Baron, 
now in his age, as freshly priding himself 
on sagacity, such as no arts could baffle, 
came hither, fortified against the evidence, 
to abide by his first opinion. 

There sat in the White Hall, that day, 
many bishops and barons of the realm, 
such as usually composed the King's court, 
when he wore his crown and held the high 
festivals of the year. These seldom had 
been kept at Kenilworth, but, when his 
Highness was not at his palace at Westminster, either Winchester, or Windsor, Salisbury, Gloucester, York, or other great 
cities of the realm were the scenes of them. 
At such times, not only was justice admi




nistered to his subjects, but the great 
councils of the realm were held, and laws 
were made. Then also were honours dispensed ; the King making some knights, 
others barons, as it so pleased him, and 
the opportunity required. There too, 
sometimes, were contracted, or solemnized, such marriages of his own family, 
or of his nobles, as he countenanced ; and 
too often was it said of King Henry, that 
he bestowed upon strangers, favourites 
in his com-t, the richest heiresses of his 
kingdom. 

At these high festivals of the year, he 
was in trowth a sovereign, wearing his 
crown, sitting on his throne, and swaying 
all the princely power of his sceptre. Then 
he received homage of his tenants in chief, 
knights and other ; levied fines, and with 
the help of his justicier, barons and prelates, managed his revenues. How far his 
Highness was governed by their council. 






t 





when he was so hard upon the golden citizens of London, who, in his reign paid 
in fines for his favour, twenty thousand 
pounds, I know not. But, never did he 
practise such cruel means of extortion as 
did his father, King John. 

At such times, too, were decided trials 
by combat ; and among the gorgeous spectacles, then held forth, tilt and tournament 
surpassed. 

But to come back again unto this festival of Kenilworth. The King sat not, 
this day, upon his throne in court, but 
upon a chair, beside his justicier, whom he 
wished to do his part there. He meant 
not his-self to speak sentence upon the 
prisoner, as at Westminster he had done 
upon Peter de Rivallis, his treasurer, whom 
he sent from open court to the tower of 
London, by his own word of command. 
Amongst other of the King's chief officers, 
who this day kept state in court, were 





the Earl of Hereford, Lord Constable of 
England; the Earl of Norfolk, Lord 
Mareschall of England ; Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, the King's Seneschall ; the High Chamberlain ; the Chancellor, and the Treasurer. The Archbishop of York was not there ; being, as 
the Baron de Blondeville and the Prior 
of Saint Mary's well knew, yet at Coventry ; and, therefore, had they so hurried 
forward this business. 

It was suspected, that the Baron and 
his friend had taken special means, that 
the jury, chosen for this trial, might be 
such as were likely men to serve their 
views ; and they feared not, that the King 
would now do as he had formerly done at 
Winchester. There, as is well known, 
some merchants of Brabant, having accused to his Highness some of his household of having robbed them, the thieves, 
on being brought to trial, were acquitted 




by the jury ; who, though wealthy men, 
were proved to be in league with the 
offenders ; on which, the King, without 
scruple, commanded them to prison ; and 
caused another jury to be summoned, who 
found them guilty of that they had been 
charged with. But the Baron trusted 
enough in the King's kindness not to fear 
he would do the like now. 

What passed in the merchant's mind, 
while now in court, waiting his trial, may 
not be told, within compass ; save that he 
resolved, when opportunity should come, 
boldly to charge the Prior with possessing 
the golden chain, worn by his kinsman 
when he fell, and of having been an accomplice in that foul deed. 

For, well he now remembered, where 
he had first seen his face and heard his 
voice. This was at a little hostel, where 
he and his companions had rested them 
awhile, a few hours before the robbery. 





There, in the settle, beside the blazing 
logs, sat that same Prior, drinking mead. 
He wore not then the garments of the 
church, which he should never have put 
on, but the livery of war ; and the merchant had taken him for a common follower of some knight, so coarse and worn 
were the clothes beneath his hauberk. 
When they were departing, he asked 
which road they went, feigning to be fearful, in those times, of passing alone through 
the forest : and, having learned their way, 
said his was different, and bade them well 
to Kenilworth, ere night should come on. 

Afterwards, during the perpetration of 
the crime, the merchant, who discerned 
not his person, nor his features, through 
the disguise lie had taken, soon as he 
spoke, recollected the voice ; and, within 
a short time, he had recognized both 
voice and features in the same man ; 
though the countenance was so changed 





and bloated, and the present voice so artificial, that this recollection had not come, 
but by accident. The present dress of 
the Prior, too, and his station had gone 
to retard this. But now, when tones and 
countenance had been partly recollected, 
and that golden chain was seen on the 
same individual, Woodreeve was not suffered to doubt, that the Prior of Saint 
Mary's was one of those, who had robbed 
him. Nor was that so wonderful in times, 
when lawless violence had almost overrun the whole land ; and when the King, 
as has been seen, found it necessary to 
commit to prison twelve householders of 
Hampshire, for having leagued with thieves 
in his own household ! 

But to come back, once more, to what 
passed this day, in the Court. It were 
tedious to tell of all this— of the names 
of such as assisted in the judgment, or of 
the forms and ceremonies, observed during 




the trial; though these were curious to 
behold, and in themselves most grave and 
princely. Nevertheless, some things shall 
be related, which more nearly concerned 
the prisoner, and which struck many persons with marvellous dread. We vouch 
not for the truth of all here told ; we only 
repeat what others have said and their 
selves credited ; but in these days what 
is there of strange and wonderful, which 
does not pass as current as the coin of the 
land ; and what will they not tell in hall, 
or chamber, seated by night over blazing 
logs, as if their greatest pleasure were to 
fear? 

Some, who tell the story, say they were 
witnesses in court of what passed there, 
and that the marvels brought about, were 
through the arts of that same joculator, 
who came into the banquet-hall, before 
the visions there shown, and who, they 
scrupled not to say, was one of those 





magicians, from the East, who were well 
known to have raised strange delusions in 
many a hall here in England. But this 
man was not seen in court, that day, nor 
had he been seen, any where, either in the 
castle, or town, since that memorable night 
of the festival, though strict search had 
been made for him. 

The accusation against Woodreeve ran 
thus. It charged him with having raised 
up certain delusions, by means of unlawful 
arts of withcraft, or of magic, to the end 
of persuading the King and his nobles, 
that the charge of a dreadful crime, imputed by the prisoner to the Baron de 
Blondeville, was true. And it farther 
alleged, that he had by witchcraft acted 
upon the person of the Baron, causing, at 
divers times, a suspicion of all his faculties, 
and, as it were, binding up his whole soul 
in a trance, so that he could neither speak, 
nor see, nor move. There were, it was 





affiimed, hundreds in the court, who had 
seen the marvellous pageant, which had 
appeared on the night of the great banquet, and not one could tell how it came 
thither, or by whom it was invented. 
They were many also, who had seen the 
Baron's condition, both in chapel and hall. 
And it seemed plain enough, that all 
this was the work of evil sprite, in league 
with an artful man. Who this might be, 
whether the poor merchant, or that strange 
minstrel, that had entered the hall of 
festival, who was there, that might tell? 
Many and divers were the opinions and 
sayings upon this affair ; but, though all 
thought the delusion supernatural, none 
held the merchant to be guilty of it. Nay, 
there were not wanting those, who willingly credited, that the Baron was guilty 
of aU, which the vision seemed to accuse 
him of; yet none dared hint such thought, 
knowing the place he held in the King's 





favour. And, perchance, this very high 
favour, shown forth by the new title 
granted to him, did inchne many, though 
the cause was unknown of themselves, to 
judge the worst of him. 

Now, when all the proceedings were 
finished, the jury thought the same as the 
many, that, though there had been evil 
practices, there was nothing to show that 
the prisoner knew ought of them; and 
so they said by their verdict. But when 
all looked to him to remark his joy, they 
saw his countenance still anxious and fearful. The trowth is, he dreaded the Prior, 
more than any other enemy, and that he 
would pursue him far more artfully than 
the Baron had done. 

The King was much disturbed at the 
verdict given, and the Baron would have 
been more so, had he not trusted to the 
further measures of his friend. 

But now it was, that the poor merchant, 





finding himself detained and seeing the 
peril in wait for him, accused the Prior 
of Saint Mary's, of having been one of the 
robbers, confederates of the Baron de Blondeville, affirming that he his-self had seen 
on his neck a chain, which had been taken 
from his murdered friend. 

By the King and most present, this accusation was considered as the effort of 
a desperate man ; and it took away from 
him all pity, and turned their hearts against 
him. Others there were, who judged less 
hardly of him, and these suspected, that 
his brain was disordered by the fits he was 
subject to have at times, and would have 
had him withdrawn from the judge, and 
taken in hand by the physician. 

But the Prior had already delivered in 
an accusation against him, not only of 
having practised magical arts, but of having forcibly attempted his life; and the 
court must do their duty. So, a new jury 





having been called, this second trial of 
Woodreeve began, at the especial petition 
of the Prior and by command of the King. 
The Baron remained in court, and som> 
observed he seemed as earnest in the Prior's 
cause as he had been in his own. 

This latter charge having been fully 
stated, the first witness examined was the 
prison-keeper of Caesar's tower, and the 
jury scrupled not to hear his say, though 
he must condemn himself of want of vigilance, at least, if he did not accuse the prisoner of arts superior to human resistance. 
This man said, that he had secured the 
prison -chamber, at the usual hour, and 
that, during the night, all had remained 
so still, you might have heard a leaf stir, 
save, that, at the second watch-piping, the 
wayte had called out to him, that some 
one had entered the tower ; when he, finding the strong door fastened, as he had left 
it, and not having before heard any noise, 





knew this could not have been, and so had 
told the wayte. On the morrow, going as 
usual to the prison-chamber, he found that 
door secure, as he had made it, but when 
he undid it — the merchant was no longer 
within ! He could account for his disappearance by no mortal means ; and so he 
ended his say. 

Then the knights, on ser\dce at the 
great portal, were questioned, and their 
answers were partly to the same pui-pose. 
One of them, indeed, said he had heard a 
noise from the room over the dungeon, 
soon after the wayte had piped the third 
watch ; but, on trying the door, he found 
it fast, and so thought no more of it. And 
now it cannot be doubted, that the knight, 
who was the secret friend of the Baron de 
Blondeville, had tampered with his companions, or, in some way, had deceived them, 
since they could thus slightly treat that, 
which had caused a clarion to be sounded. 





But, they could truly say, as they did, that 
they had seen no one go forth of the gates, 
or move any where, save thek own men. 
And, knowing that they had been too 
bountiful of wine to those of the port-culHs 
chamber, they might dislike, and avoid to 
say anything, that would lead to a discovery of the condition of those drowsy 
guards. 

These wardours of the port-cullis room 
being questioned, touching the fastening 
of the tower-door, one of them took that 
matter upon himself ; for, though none of 
them knew what had happened, yet did 
they, for their own credit, conceal their 
ignorance, save he, who said, that he 
thought one came in the night and gave 
him a blow ; but he knew not how he got 
away, nor any thing more about his assailant ! " You were slumbering on your 
post, Carle," said his examiner; but this 
he stoutlv denied, to the admiration of 





the poor prisoner, who knew the whole 
party had been in such deep sleep, that he 
had heard them snorting two chambers off. 
For this the Prior had his-self accounted, 
as before rehearsed ; but he allowed not 
himself to smile. 

Next were called the wayte and his 
gi'oom ; and the old man deposed he had 
seen some one pass through the upper 
court, as he was going the second round, 
so closely muffled up, he knew not who 
he was, and the person had passed by so 
quickly, that, though he pursued his steps, 
yet could he never see him after. He 
thought he had gone to Csesar's tower ; 
but, on giving an alarm there, he found he 
had mistaken, the keeper having declared 
he had seen no one enter. Afterwards, he 
had searched the upper court, and questioned those on guard there, but they had 
neither seen nor heard any thing. Still, not 
being satisfied that all was right, he had 

 





taken his station in the porch opposite to 
the great tower, and there watched out 
the night, save when he had piped his 
rounds ; hut he had not seen any one 
come forth of the tower, nor any persons 
hut the guard, the whole night long. 
This testimony of the wayte the guard 
confirmed. 

During these narratives of the witnesses, the Prior kept an unconcerned 
countenance, and none present suspected 
him of being that unknown person ; while 
many thought the prisoner his-self was 
the man, on his way out of the castle, 
and that the wayte had mistaken the 
course he took. 

When the sentinels of the ramparts and 
posterns were questioned, all were found 
to agree, that no living thing had been 
seen, or heard, from wall or battlement, to 
pass forth of the Castle, during that night. 
Then were most of the persons present 




confirmed in their suspicion, that the merchant possessed some secret art, by which 
he had conveyed himself from the Castle 
into the Priory. It signified not to their 
apprehension, that such art, if he had 
possessed it, might have conveyed him 
clean away from his enemies ; they troubled not themselves to think so far ; or, 
perchance, they guessed there were certain 
limits and boundaries to the power of 
magic. But, whether the limit here drawn 
was consistent with the end designed, who 
was there, that could judge ? 

After these witnesses, the Prior his- self 
came forward and repeated his own tale, at 
length, such as he had already related it to 
the King. And he brought several of his 
monks and others of the convent, as evidence, that the prisoner had, in the midst 
of the night, fled from the great chamber 
of the Priory to the church, and there 
sought refuge at the sanctuary, as if he 

 





dreaded punishment for some crime. They 
dwelt on the disorder and emotion he had 
betrayed, the seeming consciousness of 
guilt, and the boldness and desperation, 
with which he had accused the Prior of 
having unlawfully possessed himself of the 
golden chain, which he, this day in Court, 
had made the subject of accusation against 
him. This chain, they said, pertained to 
an amulet, which had preserved their Prior's life from the dagger of the assassin ; 
on which chain the prisoner had, though 
standing apart at the sanctuary, so wrought, 
it being then in the hands of certain 
brethren of the house, as to cause a painting to appear, that was not there before. 

While this tale was telling, the Archbishop of York, who was just returned from 
his visit to the Bishop of Coventry, then 
lying in grievous sickness, had entered 
the Court, and taken his proper place. He 
it was, who inquired, whether this golden 





chain were at hand ; on which the high 
justicier ordered it should be produced. 
Then, the Prior, who pretended a wish to 
show it, drew it forth from his neck, and, 
it was carried to the King, who examined 
it, looking long on the painting of that 
fair dame, the widow of the unfortunate 
knight. Close within the rim of that picture was drawn a little face, like unto a 
cherub looking up, in peace, to the Lady, 
who seemed to smile upon him, in tender 
affection. The Archbishop, when he perused the picture, was wonderly struck 
both with the resemblance to the shadow 
he had seen in the hall, and w-ith that of 
the fair dame, which had been there presented in the pageant. 

The King, looking again upon the picture, acknowledged the likeness, and then 
summoning the Baron to his side, showed 
him the portrait, and put the chain into 
his hands ; who, having received it on his 





knee, rose up, and withdrew to a window, 
the better to examine it. Thither followed him the eyes of the Archlnshop and 
the Prior, but each with different interest 
and motive for watchfulness. My Lord of 
York observed the chain to tremble in its 
holder's hand, and believed, that Woodreeve had spoken the truth. 

The Prior saw, that the countenance of 
his associate was altered, and hoped that 
he would be resolute, during the whole 
trial ; each was contented, in his own way, 
and awaited calmly what might follow. 
But, when the Baron had gazed awhile, 
he became agitated. He seemed to shrink, 
and, averting his face from the object he 
contemplated, he held it nearly at arm's 
length. Then, he looked again, drawing 
the portrait nearer to his sight, and then, 
again withdrew it, while a livid paleness 
overspread his countenance, and he seemed 
hardly able to support himself. 





Then, as if regaining all his courage, he 
left the window ; but, instead of returning 
the portrait to the King, he was conveying it to the Prior, when my Lord Archbishop cried out, " My Lord, his Highness, hath not yet done with that chain ; 
give it into the hands, from which you received it." 

The Baron stopped ; he seemed to be 
angered, and, half turning with a haughty 
mien and frowning look, he answered,  I 
obey no command but the King's." 

On this the King, graciously smiling, 
said, " I desire it of you." 

The Baron, immediately advancing to 
the state chair, dropped his knee, and presented the chain ; on receiving which and 
looking again upon the picture, his Highness spoke with surprise to the Baron, 
who bowed, with a disclaiming gestiu-e, 
and said a few words, which none nigh 
could hear ; while Prince Edward, who 





stood on the steps, below the King's 
chair, viewed him with a suspicious eye ; 
for, young as he was, he had observed 
that in him, which he hked not. And 
now he saw with wonder, the earnestness, with which his father looked upon 
the picture; for he knew not, that it 
showed the likeness of the knight, who 
had appeared in the banquet-hall. 

Unknowingly, the Baron had touched 
the spring, which disclosed this portrait, 
and had shut up that of the unhappy 
widow. Prince Edward looked again on 
the Baron, thinking he had wrought some 
change in the picture, leading to mischief and designed against the prisoner, to 
whose cause his heart secretly inclined 
him. From all that he had seen before, and 
on this day, he judged him to be innocent 
of evil intention ; and he had not failed to 
tell the King, his father, privately all his 
thoughts. 





But his Highness, whose understanding 
was often baffled by his humours and by 
the arts of cunning men, thought not with 
his son in this matter ; and, he moreover, 
suspected this change in the painting to 
be wrought by the merchant, or his agents, 
as the Prior had before affirmed; or by 
some new art of magic. Still his sight 
dwelt on that portrait, whose look of quiet 
sadness so much remembered him of 
that, which the knight in the pageant had 
shown, when departing from his, family 
and his native shore. After long perusing 
the portrait, the King hfted his eyes from 
it, and beheld ! once more before him, the 
form of that very knight, such as had appeared on the steps of the dais. 

It was in truth the very image of this 

shadowed forth here in miniature ; the 

same armour, worn in the same way, with 

vizor up, and the eyes showing that same 

solemn and resigned look, save that they 
 





were now fixed, somewhat sternly on the 
King. It seemed as if his Highness only 
perceived this person, while he sat motionless, and, for some moments, silent. 

Then he rose hastily, and commanded, that the stranger should be secured ! 
Vain command. Those, who heard it, perceived not for whom it was designed ; 
but looked upon each other with wonder 
and amazement : and many there were 
near him, who feared his Highness was 
stricken with sudden distemper. Whether 
the Archbishop saw aught, or only suspected the cause is not known ; but he 
was observed to make that holy gesture, 
which formerly he had used in the greater 
hall. The King, with some anger, repeated his command ! but he whom he 
would have seized, no more appeared. 

For awhile, his Highness seemed struck 
with dismay ; he sat and covered his eyes 





with his hand, reclining him in his chair. 
Then, imputing this appearance to the 
same art as the former, dread gave way 
to indignation against the prisoner ; and 
he resolved to have immediate justice 
done ; not only in punishment of past 
offences, but to put an end to those deceits and mischiefs, from which it seemed, 
that even his-self was not secured. Sometimes, too, he doubted whether this man 
might not be an agent of his bitter enemy, Le welly n of Wales ; by whose evil 
arts he had, as he deemed, been formerly 
robbed of that precious ring, which was 
to render him invincible in war. If this 
were so, the prisoner added to the guilt 
of being a spy and a traitor, that of feigned agitations and sorrow, touching a deed 
never committed. 

Order being given that the trial should 
immediately proceed, the Baron de Blonde ville, who, wliile this image had re




mained before the King, was busied in 
another part of the hall, and thus escaped 
its influence, advanced to the chair, and 
received again the chain, with intent to 
deliver it to the Prior. Now, that which 
follows, was reported of many present in 
the court, with what truth I know not ; 
but it is here faithfully related. 

No sooner had the Baron received into 
his hand that golden chain, than the eyes 
of all near were fixed upon his robe. It 
was the same he wore on the night of 
the banquet, and on which, when passing 
from the King's chamber, through the 
brown gallery with the Prior, and meeting 
there the marvellous stranger, three drops 
of blood had fallen. These had been partly 
erased ; but they were now not unnoticed, 
though none knew whence they came. 

No sooner had he received this chain of 
the deceased knight, then each little drop 





began to spread, till that side of his garment became covered, as it were, with 
crimson, seeming to maintain the notion, 
that is gone forth, that after some prolonged presence of the murderer, the blood 
of the deceased will become fresh again, 
wherever it may be found, as if newly 
shed. 

The King, 'tis said, beheld this in silence, not knowing what it might mean, 
though guessing it to be some new device 
of sorcery. The Prior remained in his 
place, with downward look ; while the 
prisoner, in his, lifted up his hands to 
Heaven. 

My Lord Archbishop rose and turned 
himself to his Highness as though he would 
address him ; but he did not. Prince Edward's looks were bent steadily upon the 
Baron, as were also most of those, that 
composed the King's court, but no one 





spoke, each awaiting for what another 
might first say. There was a general confusion and amazement in the hall. 

The Baron his-self stood looking down 
upon his garment, with the chain trembling in his hand. How long he might have 
continued standing there none knew, had 
not the King's voice recalled him from his 
trance, and bade him deliver the chain to 
the secretary at the table, there to remain, 
till the trial should conclude. He obeyed 
with looks, that seemed to say this command foretold some diminution of favour ; 
and, after his having delivered it, behold 
a new marvel ; for that great crimson 
stain began to separate into three parts, 
and then to lessen and fade away, till it 
wholly disappeared, leaving his robe bright 
and rich as before. 

Then there was a general tumult and 
outcry in the court, of, " justice, justice ! 
the prisoner hath spoken the truth ! The 





chain of the deceased hath borne witness 
against the Baron, the Baron de BlondeviUe." 

At these words, the Baron seemed to recover all his spirit ; he threw a glance of indignation round the court, and then, walking firmly up to the King, did homage, and 
remained on his knee, ready to plead 
for protection, when the tumult should 
subside. Again my Lord, the Archbishop, 
turned towards his Highness, calmly awaiting the return of silence. The Prior also 
stood up, and was haranguing, with vehement gesticulation, though no one could 
hear a single word he uttered. But the 
poor merchant, having seen this second 
marvellous sign in his favour, testified no 
presumptuous joy ; he had sunk down, 
overcome with humble gratitude, unable 
either to speak, or to shed a tear. 

In vain the King raised his arm on high, 
and his chief justicier stood up, with 





stem countenance, to restore order ; each 
individual spectator followed the promptings of his own thoughts, and uttered 
them without scruple, though scarcely any 
one could be heard. And thus it went, for 
some time, till divers of the crowd, without the hall, hearing that something extraordinary was passing within, pressed 
forward to the court, so that those sitting 
there became afraid for their lives, and the 
King's guards were called upon to do their 
duty, which they at last performed, with 
no small difficulty. 

At this so flagrant a breach of good 
'haviour in the King's court and in his very 
presence, his Highness was much moved, 
and he willingly attributed it to the malignant passions of pride and jealousy directed against the Baron de Blondeville, who 
was doubly obnoxious, as being a stranger 
by birth and exalted by favour. So his 
Highness became more warmly attached to 





his cause than before, and more resolute to 
protect him against the united force of his 
enemies. Silence being at last restored, his 
Highness bade the Baron de Blondeville 
"Rise, and fear not; for justice shall overtake the guilty." The Archbishop liked 
not the King's frown, as he spoke these 
words, and he sat down disdainfully, without uttering what was in his mind. 

Not so the Prior of Saint Mary's, who 
had been impatiently watching for the moment, when he might be heard, and who 
now boldly cried out, " My Lord Archbishop, 
will you now credit the truth that is before you ? Will you now deny the power 
of sorcery ? Here, in the very court, this 
false accuser has unwarily betrayed his 
guilt ; here, in the face of justice, exercising his art, with a view to deprive the 
Baron de Blondeville both of honour and 
of life, he has made evident the truth of my 
accusation against himself. You yourself, 



 

have now witnessed, that a spell is in that 
chain, which his presence has put in movement, and you can no longer question 
what I have related of yesternight, or of 
his motive for exercising his infamous art. 
He has caused these paintings to appear in 
the chain, that he may claim it for his deceased kinsman's, who, he pretends, was 
murdered, that by this circumstance he 
may prove the extravagant and ridiculous 
charge he has fabricated against me. By 
the same arts of sorcery, exercised upon the 
Baron's robe, he would confirm the other 
slander he has uttered — that against the 
Baron de Blondeville ; and, by connecting 
this second marvel with the first, he would 
fain make it appear, that the Baron and 
myself were confederated in the same 
crime. But, in so doing, he has proved 
nothing but the force of his spells and 
of his malice, and has turned them unwittingly against himself alone, since his 





Highness cannot be deceived. My Lord 
Archbishop, will you now deny the power 
of sorcery ?" 

When he had ceased, the Archbishop 
rose with calm and dignified countenance, 
as of one, who holds the balance in his 
own hands ; and, without deigning to notice the Prior, he called upon the justicier 
to put an end to this irregular proceeding, 
and to make the trial go on. It was only 
in submission to the King, that this disorderly interruption had been permitted by 
the High Justicier, his Highness having 
given him a sign, that the Prior should be 
heard ; but now he willingly resumed his 
duty. However, the words of the Prior 
had not been in vain ; for, they took effect 
upon the minds of many in the court, to 
the prejudice of the poor merchant, and to 
a confirmation of both charges against him, 
that of sorcery, and that of attempted assassination. And thus it seemed, that the 





very marvel, which at first made against 
the Baron, being now warped and twisted 
by the so crafty Prior, was likely to end in 
the prisoner's ruin. 

Then, the merchant his-self was examined; but the truth which he told, of 
the Prior having come to him and offered 
him liberty, appeared less plausible than 
his accusers falsehood. That he should 
have hesitated to accept the freedom 
thus offered, few could credit ; yet the testimony of the wayte, seemed to support 
Woodreeve's story, which, had he been suffered to proceed, would have been further 
proved by his account of the many secret 
ways, through which he was conducted, 
and which were so little known, that by 
hardly any other means than those of 
experience, could he have been made acquainted with them. But, when he began 
to tell of that door in the Constable's great 
chamber, which led into those passages of 





the walls and so, by covert windings, down 
into the port-cullis room, and to those hidden vaults below, he was suddenly checked in his story. Those, who willed not, 
that these secrets, and, partly, safeguards 
of the castle, should be made public, denied that there were such ; and, feigning to 
be weary of so long-winding a tale, they 
brought it to a speedy conclusion, by commanding the prisoner to be less tedious 
and to account for his appearance in the 
Prior's chamber, which surely was not in 
the castle, but in the Priory. Now, how 
could he fully do so, but by tracing out all 
his steps thither? And this he was forbidden to do ; and he could not but see, 
that he should be resolutely contradicted 
by those, who, if they had no concert with 
his enemies, fancied they were required by 
duty to tell a falsehood — as if any duty to 
man could require that ! Being then, forbidden to take this course, he only related, 





that, having followed the Prior into a subterraneous way under the castle-ditch, 
hoping it would lead him to the forest, his 
life had been threatened by the Prior, on 
his discovering and claiming that very 
golden chain, which had been shown this 
day in court. He further told, that, having escaped from the uplifted dagger, he 
had fled along that avenue, which brought 
him to the Prior's chamber, whence he 
had again been compelled to fly from pursuit, which had scarcely permitted him 
even the rights of sanctuary. 

While the prisoner was telling this part 
of his story, the most profound silence 
reigned throughout that hall, where lately 
not one voice could be heard from another ; nay, hardly the trumpet of the 
King's guard, amidst the stormy multitude. Many, while they listened, found 
themselves inclining to the merchant's 




cause ; and some would entirely believe, 
that he had spoken only the truth. 

Amongst the latter, were the young 
Prince Edward and the venerable Archbishop — ingenuous youth and discerning 
age. Always, indeed, had the conscientious sagacity of the Archbishop inclined 
him to Woodreeve's cause ; and what he 
had heard formerly and lately at Coventry, respecting the Prior, confirmed his 
opinion. He knew also enough of the 
ways, employed by some in those times to 
procure riches, to be incredulous of the 
strange history of this Prior, whose unaccountable wealth had procured for him his 
present rank from the Pope's legate. 

Others present there were, who, though 
but too well acouainted with the lawless 
and desperate manners of those days, yet 
refused to acknowledge, that a man of the 
Prior's office and rank could be guilty of 




the crime. Amongst those, who inclined 
to the prisoner, were some of the jury; 
when now there came into court, one 
Aaron, a Jew of Lincoln. He came in 
not by accident ; but, as some shrewdly 
guessed, was sent by those, who, knowing 
the man, and his way of trade, designed 
to make him an instrument on this occasion. 

The business, that first brought him to 
Kenilworth, was to pay the Queen that 
usual surplus of a King's fine, called " Aurum Reginse." This man had been heavily 
fined ; and, as it is said, for having falsified a charter. However this might be, 
he had now to pay, to the Queen alone, 
about six hundred marks ; in present payment for which sum, her Highness took of 
him a transfer of a deed, by which this Jew 
held in pawn of John Vavasour, the manor 
of Hazlewood, which that ancient family 
had held of the de Percies, even in the 





Conqueror's reign. The deed, thus rescued by the Queen from the Jew, who had 
withheld it, that he might extort for it 
an exorbitant sum, was by her returned 
to the same John, on his paying to her 
the rehersed sum of six hundred marks. 
But this circumstance is here related only, 
that it may appear what sort of person 
this Jew was, on whose word might probably depend the life of an innocent man. 
Now, this Aaron, when he came into the 
hall, and was produced as a witness, desired to see that same golden chain, worn 
of the Prior and sworn to of the merchant, as having been about the neck of 
his deceased kinsman, at the time of the 
murder. 

On this, the Prior, looking hardly at 
the Jew, feigned to remember him, saying, as he delivered up the chain, " You 
should know it well ; for, if I err not, it 
was of you that I purchased it. I was 







then returning from a prilgrimage to the 
shrine of Saint Hugh, at Lincoln." 

" You are right," quoth the Jew ; " this 
chain, I remember me, I sold to you for 
fifty marks of gold, some five or six years 
back. You were not then Prior of Saint 
Mary's, but a brother of Coventry." 

" Behold !" said the Prior, " one who 
can bear testimony against the false story 
of the prisoner. Let an oath be administered unto him." 

" He is a Jew !" cried out a voice ; " his 
oath may not be taken." 

" The law is against it," said another ; 
" but who may prevent his word being 
credited ?" 

The Prior then demanded of him whether he remembered any paintings concealed in the chain ? and the Jew replied, 
that there were no paintings, when he sold 
it to him ; but to the chain itself he could 
swear, if he were permitted to do so. He 





had bought it of a goldsmith of London, 
then hving in Chepe ; it was of fine gold, 
and of the best workmanship ; for that 
citizen of London had in his workshop 
one Giocondi, a Florentine, w ho was famous for such things ; and by him was it 
made. With those fine paintings, he should 
have valued the whole at not less than one 
hundred marks. 

Here again was a contention, whether 
the oath of a Jew could be received ; some 
saying the law was against it; others, 
that, when King John's reign ended, that 
law had ceased. And thus it went, for 
some time, till the King, rising from his 
chair, commanded that an oath should be 
administered, and this was done, after the 
Archbishop had obtained of the court, that 
the oath to be taken of the Jew should not 
be such as we swear. Then the Archbishop, 
turning towards the Prior, demanded of 
what house in Coventry he had been a 
 





brother, and at what time he had purchased the chain. 

" At the time of my pilgrimage to 
Saint Hugh, of Lincoln," answered the 
Prior ; " then I purchased that chain of 
Aaron." 

" Of what house where you a brother ?" 
repeated the Archbishop sternly. 

" Of Saint Nicholas." 

"Of what order."~-Of the benedictine." 

" I know not of any house at Coventry, 
that is both of that name and order," observed the Archbishop. 

" I said not I was of Coventry," replied 
the Prior. 

" Your friend has said so," urged the 
Archbishop, " and till now, you have not 
contradicted him." 

" The Jew is mistaken," said the Prior ; 
' I know not that he is my friend ; if he 
were so, in trowth, he would have been 
better acquainted with my former abode." 

" Answer, without further evasion," said 





the Archbishop, "and tell to what town 
and brotherhood you belonged at the time 
of your pilgrimage." 

"I was then of the Priory of Saint 
Nicholas, in Exeter." 

"Yonr's was a long pilgrimage," said 
the Archbishop, fixing his eyes attentively 
upon the Prior. 

My Lord Bishop said not more, but 
listened constantly to the further evidence 
of this Aaron, which went hard against 
the merchant, touching the matter of the 
chain, and when one, who pleaded for 
the Prior, drew up each particular of the 
prisoner's tale, such as he had his-self related it, many improbable circumstances 
appeared on the face of it. To those unacquainted with his enemies' true history 
and character, there seemed to be little 
motive for his attempt to lead away Woodreeve from his prison, to give him liberty, 
if that were in trowth the end he had in 
view, when he was said to have conducted 





him from the tower ; and, if that were not 
his end, and he had designed to prevent 
any discovery of his own former guilt, 
by the assassination of the merchant, why, 
said they, did he pass over the opportunity, 
afforded by that avenue described by the 
prisoner himself, as so secret and remote. 
To these persons there appeared neither 
cause sufficient to have urged the Prior 
to draw forth a poniard with intent to 
kill, nor, having done so, any motive to 
restrain his hand, in a place so convenient 
to his purpose. 

For Woodreeve, when he related that 
the Prior appeared horror-struck at the 
moment of aiming the dagger, had not 
explained the cause of this, nor did he 
his-self know it, though by it his life had 
been saved. Neither, if he had know n and 
related it, would they, in all likehood, have 
heeded hun ; but it was afterwards supposed, that the Prior, at that dangerous 




moment, had been awed by the appearance 
of the deceased knight. 

These considerations, together with the 
evidence of the Jew, at last determined 
the jury against the poor merchant, who 
was adjudged guilty of having attempted 
the Hfe of the Prior and of having practised arts of sorcery, which, it was supposed, had been made visible this day, in 
open court. 

On this verdict, many made known their 
satisfaction, and approached the Baron 
de Blondeville, and the Prior, with joyful 
words. But there was not one to shed 
a tear with the prisoner, or who dared to 
show him any sign of sympathy. 

My Lord Archbishop seemed much disposed to do so ; for, his countenance expressed grave displeasure, when all was 
joy around him. Even the smiles of the 
King could not move him to any show of 
accordance. It became plain he thought 





the condemned person innocent ; and, perhaps, he suspected, that the witnesses and 
even the jury had been unduly practised 
with ; but of this he spoke nothing. 
Prince Edward, too, seemed not well 
pleased with this transaction ; for, his eyes 
were sometimes sternly fixed on the Prior, 
and even on the Baron himself, whose 
heart was now at ease, who stood on the 
steps of the King's chair, cap in hand, discoursed to by his Highness. 

But there was one present in the court, 
though unseen, whose joy did equal his. 
This was the Lady-baroness, his fair bride, 
who, from a gallery on high, concealed 
from view by a lattice-work, had anxiously watched all, which passed in court, and 
now, that the honour of her lord was 
rescued from what she had been taught 
to think was but the malice of a secret 
enemy, she had nearly sunk under the 
tumult of the contrary feelings of joy for 





one, and pity for the unhappy instrument 
of the other. 

Woodreeve,. weighed down with grief 
and despair, was led back to his prison 
through a curious and busy crowd, too 
many of them willing to see him suffer 
death without delay, eager for some new 
spectacle. But his sentence was postponed, during the King's pleasure, who, well 
contented with the verdict, meant not that 
the dreadful infliction should take place, 
till after his own departure from Kenilworth ; and thus the court broke up ; 
Woodreeve to his prison-tower, there to 
await his fate ; the Prior to his home, secretly to exult in the success of his wicked 
wiles, and to plot new ones ; the Archbishop to his chamber, there to meditate 
alone ; the Baron, to rejoice with the 
unsuspecting Lady Barbara ; the King to 
refresh himself, and the whole Court to 
talk over what had passed ; and to prepare 





them for the diversions and merriment appointed for the approaching evening, unsuitable as they were, at this time. 

The merchant, when he had once more 
taken possession of his solitary turret, desired means wherewith to send a letter 
to his wife — for he could write — that she, 
now at distance, and in daily expectation 
of his return, might be somewhat prepared for his fate. But, even this poor 
request was denied him, under pretence, 
that it was feared he might work, with 
unlawful characters in the black art, further evil against those he had accused, or 
those, who had the custody of him. 

While the trial had been proceeding 
in the White Hall, the Queen, with many 
noble ladies attending, went into the Hall 
of Banquet, to view the shields of the 
knights, candidates for prizes in a tournament, which had been appointed for the 
morrow ; and there a strange accident 





happened. The shields were hung in array, round this gorgeous hall, and the 
banner of each knight waved over his 
shield. An officer of arms attended, who 
called aloud to whom each shield belonged, with the name and full titles of the 
owner ; that, if any lady had cause of 
complaint, against any knight-candidate, 
she might touch his shield ; and, Avithout 
aid of words, this action was sufficient to 
cause that shield to be taken from its 
place ; that, if, on inquiry, there were 
reason to suppose him guilty of any "haviour derogatory to the honour of chivalry, 
his name might be erased from amongst 
those of the candidates, and himself adjudged unworthy to break a lance on the 
field. 

There was now in the hall a great display 
of shields ; for, besides the many nobles and 
knights of the realm of England, who had 
entered their names for the lists, there 






were knights, drawn hither from all quarters ; some from France, some from Scotland, and some from Germany. Amidst 
this show of shields, which had been here 
for some days, and which had not been 
disturbed by the late trial, three spaces 
on the walls betrayed, that three knights 
had been abeady accused. To many, who 
looked upon these vacancies, the blanks 
there seemed to plead for those whose 
shields had been condemned ; when, perhaps, their enemies could not have proved 
aught against them, had they been accused in any other manner. The Baron 
de Blondeville's was not one of these proscribed shields. 

Now, it happened, during this visit of 
very many ladies, that one amongst them 
went from shield to shield, examining the 
bearings in each, without awaiting the due 
progress of the herald, in his course of 
explanation, around the walls. Looking 





deliberately at every shield, she stood still 
before several, and seemed to meditate. 
Meanwhile, the singularity of her conduct 
and appearance drew the attention of 
many persons. She was not habited in 
the fashion of the court, or in any dress 
of ceremony, but wore a mourning robe 
and a veil, that flowed to her feet, but this 
had been lifted, while she was examining 
the shields, and even now partly betrayed 
her face. She was not of the court, nor 
was she known of any of those, who gave 
attention to her; yet had she an air of 
distinction and of graceful ease, with, as 
some thought a foreign aspect; and each, 
who knew her not, supposed she was 
known of some other, and had good right 
to be there ; perhaps, the sister of one of 
the foreign knights. 

Her beauty was faded, yet seemed she 
young, and she had a look of sorrow and 
of wildness, too, that touched the hearts 





of many, that beheld her. By her own 
thoughts she was so much en wrapt, that 
she observed not how much she was noticed, though indeed little was said, her 
Highness the Queen being present. 

When the herald came to the shield 
of the Baron de Blondeville, which was 
blazoned high, with all his new honoiu's, 
he called forth loudly his nam.e and titles. 
Then, on a sudden, this lady seemed to 
know where she was and what she came 
there for. With grave air, yet confident, 
walking up the hall, she stayed her steps 
before his shield, and examined it deliberately, the herald somewhat lingering 
the while. Having so stood, some little 
space, she bent her head, and, covering 
her eyes with her veil, she seemed to 
weep. 

Then, lifting up her veil she stepped 
towards the shield, and touched it, looking at the herald, as she did so ; but she 





spoke not one word. And this was sufficient, as the custom went. Immediately, 
the officer at arms advanced, to take down 
the shield from the wall, which he did not 
without some difficulty. 

The Queen, seeing what was done, and 
that it was the Baron de Blondeville's 
shield, that was displaced, inquired who 
was the lady, that had caused its disgrace. 
But no one could tell, and she had already 
left the hall, well contented with what 
had been done. Then her Highness, blaming the herald for his speed, commanded, 
that the steps of this fair accuser should 
be followed, and her name and rank declared, that it might appear now whether 
her act were worthy to take so much effect, and, afterwards whether she had just 
cause of grief and complaint. And, until 
these things, or some of them, should be 
known, she bade the herald replace the 
shield on the wall. 





So the Lord-Marshall of England, who 
was attending upon her Highness, was 
then compelled to speak ; and he said, 
with submission, that might not be done ; 
the laws of chivalry forbidding, unless by 
especial command of the King. So her 
Highness let that pass, weU knowing, 
that the King would order the shield to 
be replaced, except insurmountable cause 
should appear against it. And then, 
having viewed the remaining shields, she, 
with all that company of noble ladies, 
withdrew. 

But this accident caused much marvelling in the court, many thinking it 
was occasioned by some new offence of 
the Baron, and that a great deal yet remained to be told against him; others, 
that the unknown lady was the widow 
of the Knight, who, it was said, had been 
slain by him ; and that she had not gone 
away, so far, or so fast, but that her name 





might be easily learned by the heralds, 
if they were more fully ordered to discover it. Others, who held the Baron 
innocent, said this was only some new device of his enemies ; and that, if any such 
female had really appeared in the hall, she 
had doubtless got out of the reach of discovery, into some sufficient, though near 
concealment. 

The King, soon as he heard the report 
of this adventure, commanded, that strict 
search should be made for the lady-accuser ; and that, meanwhile, the Baron's 
shield should be restored to its place, unstained by suspicion ; there to remain until the morrow's tournament, or until surer 
cause should appear for remo\'ing it. 

This night, his Highness kept state, not 
in the hall, but in the great chamber ; my 
Lord, the Archbishop, being ever at his 
right hand, whose gravity seemed not to 
yield, for one moment, to all the mirth 



m 


 



around him. In trowth, he was not a 
man to be capable of festive enjoyment, 
when a fellow-creature had been recently 
condemned to wretchedness, had he even 
thought him guilty ; but he thought not 
so. On all that passed, he looked with 
equal eye, and said little, answering only 
when his Highness spoke to him. Some 
thought he looked with displeasure on 
that extravagant pomp, which was here 
displayed in every thing, at a time, when 
the King had little in his coffers, and 
knew not well how to fill them. 

With this King Henry it was ever so, 
on the score of money ; good as he was, 
on many other points, he ever lived for 
the present hour, and suffered the next to 
shift for itself. His brother, my Lord of 
Cornwall, did otherwise ; he took good 
care to gather up some of what he saw so 
bountifully scattered ; and to keep it safe 
for his own purposes in time to come. 

 

He had both cooler heart and head than 
King Henry ; who spared neither trouble 
nor money, to advance him to the height, 
which he had obtained for him, and had 
caused liim to be chosen King of the Romans, although he had once nearly raised 
a rebellion, with no better motive than 
that he wished to possess the manor of 
Berkhamstead ; and so no more of such 
matters. Only those, who attributed the 
Archbishop's more than wonted gravity, 
to the wasteful magnificence, which was 
then displaying itself before him, did not 
reach the whole course of his so thoughtful mood. 

It was, above all, the weakness of the 
King, which subjected him to the sway 
of designing men, and to be drawn aside 
from the administration of justice, that 
alarmed and grieved the bishop. And, this 
day, he thought he had beheld in him a 
striking instance of blindness to the cause 





of the oppressed. He knew, better than 
any one, the efforts he had made to warn 
the King against the Prior of St. Mary's ; 
and to persuade him, it was quite as possible the Baron de Blondeville should be 
guilty of one crime, as the prisoner of 
another ; so that his Highness should listen, without prejudice, to what appeared 
on either side ; but he could not so persuade. 

Now, before the Archbishop had left 
Kenilworth for Coventry, the King had 
been so far influenced by his ad\dce, that 
he had promised to postpone the intended 
trial of the merchant, till some further 
light should be thrown upon so extraordinary an accusation, and one made with 
astonishing hardihood ; and it was chiefly 
to obtain this information from the Bishop 
of Coventry, that his good brother went 
so hastily thither ; but it was of a bootless hope. The Bishop and the Prior 



there knew little of the character, or the 
former history of the Prior of Kenilworth ; 
what they could communicate, confirmed 
the former suspicions of the Archbishop. 

This day, when the trial was ended, he 
had despatched a messenger to the Prior 
of Saint Nicholas, in Exeter, to learn whether he knew aught of the Prior of Saint 
Mary's ; and whether the Prior had spoken 
the truth, when he said, that he had been 
a brother of the Benedictine Priory, of 
that name, in that city. Yet the great 
distance to be travelled through difficult 
roads, made it doubted whether his messenger would return, during any delay, 
which he might have sufficient influence 
to obtain of the King, in counteraction to 
that of the Baron de Blondeville and the 
Prior; who, for their own supposed security, might be urging, unceasingly, for 
speedy sentence upon their accuser. 

If the Archbishop, on this night, looked 





sad in this courtly chamber, so did not 
the Baron de Blondeville. He had now 
regained all the gaiety of his nation and 
age ; and danced a measure to the joyance of all present ; the Queen and her 
ladies declaring their admiration to the 
Baroness. Then, was there solemn dancing of many lords and noble dames ; the 
King's five harpers playing the while. 

Prince Edward, with the Baroness de 
Blondeville, performed a bass-dance, to the 
noise of the harps only. And then, finding himself oppressed with his mantle, 
which was of velvet, thickly embroidered, 
and besides heavily guarded with gold lace, 
he impatiently threw it off, and danced a 
round right merrily in his jacket, to the 
sound of the recorders, and to the great 
diversion of the King ard Queen. Whicu 
dance being ended, the Prince brought 
his fair partner in his hand, up to the 
Queen, who sa'd many gracious things to 





her ; and, certes, for either high or solemn 
dancing, there was none that excelled her. 

After the dancing, Richard, the Khig's 
minstrel, sang to the harp one of Maister Henry's best ballads, which were so 
bright and cheering, raising up the spirits 
and the laughter of all present ; and this, 
if it flowed not fi'om the famous Helicon, 
cenes, it might be supposed to have come 
thence, and all held that it well deserved 
the butt of sack, which his Highness had 
lately bestowed upon him. 

There was not any banqueting, or late 
wassailling, this night in the hall ; for, on 
the morrow was to be the great tournament, and the most sumptuous feasting 
yet given ; and every one was willing to 
prepare for it by taking an early rest. 
And thus, after Ypocras, and wafers had 
been served, with the usual state, the 
King and Queen avoided the Great Chamber, for that night, followed by a goodly 





train of estates and gentils. Each departed to his own bower ; some to think 
on what had passed this day ; others to 
forget that such a day had been ; and 
others again, to watch for that, which was 
to come ; since joy, or the hope of it, 
often makes the young as wakeful, as 
habitual care doth the aged ; and many 
there were, whom delightsome expectation 
of the finery and pomp they should display, or behold, to-morrow, kept sleepless, 
till the wayte had piped the third watch 
and longer. Knights and esquires, lovers 
and ladies, country folk, serving-men and 
waiting-women, many a one ; and all impatiently looked for the coming hour ; but 
specially the young knights thought how 
they should triumph, in all the pride of 
prowess, before their courted fair ones ; 
and doubted not, that the happiness of 
their whole lives depended upon the coming day. 





And thus the prompt feelings of youth 
gave shape and colour and consequence 
to small circumstances, wrought into visions of their own imagination ; all vivid 
and expansive now, but which Avould be 
dim and cold and contracted, as their sun 
should decline. But woe to him, who 
would have taught them to detect these 
bright illusions, which belong to youth, as 
do the golden lights and songs of joy to 
morning! Woe to him, who would have 
set before their eyes the severe form of 
experience, and have reduced the gaieties 
of their boundless hope to the many checquered scene of real existence ! All in its 
season, comes the noon -tide ray, and melts 
the beauteous visions of the morning ; all 
in its season, comes the evening ray, when 
lengthened shadows fall on the long landscape — when the purple cloud loses its 
golden edge, and the world below sinks 
into shade, v, hich leads again to the bright 


tints of dawn — to the brighter, oh ! how 
much brighter tints of a cloudless and limitless dawn ! Are we, who would derange this order, and cast the hue of twilight before the morning or the noon-tide 
sun, better sighted tlian the Wisdom and the 
Beneficence which have ordained it otherwise ? We may watch and regulate — to do 
this is our duty ; and let us neither omit it 
])y careless and total indulgence, nor spare 
our vigilance by total proscription ; — gradually we may prepare the mind for the 
great truths, that time will cast over the 
thousand hues of hope and joyance ; and 
gradually a sense of the vanity and nothingness of this fleeting part of an eternal existence, instead of being a melancholy, will be a complacent perception, 
more than reconciUng us to the shortness 
of its imperfect joys and deeply consoling 
us for its sorrows. 



THE SEVENTH DAY. 



p o 



THE SEVENTH DAY. 

Here was a drawing of a field of tournament, 
bordering on the lake, beyond which appeared the 
towers and lake of Kenilworth. A procession of 
knights, before a lady, drawn in a stately car, was 
moving round the field, trumpeters on horseback 
going before them, and dancing figures following. 
On the opposite side of the lawn, other knights 
appeared at a barrier, on whom seemed directed 
the chief attention of the company in the numerous 
tents and galleries around ; who stood up, and leaned 
over one another, in their eagerness to view what 
was passing, or approaching. 

Below, on the margin, stood a King crowned, 
in his robes, designed for King Henry ; for it bore 
resemblance to his image in brass, placed on his 
monument in the Abbey of Saint Peter, called the 
West Minster. 



THE SEVENTH DAY. 



But, before rehersing the events of this 
day, let us not forget the night, which the 
poor merchant passed in his prison. There, 
when all noise in the castle had ceased, 
and sleep, as he thought, rested on every 
eye save his own, it was said he heard, 
at first, sounds of the most mournful warning, and, afterwards, others so sweet passed by his turret, as seemed to remember 
him, that not for any crime was he condemned, but for the grief and generous 
indignation, which had urged him to point 
out the murderer of his friend and kinsman. It seemed as if the image of that 





friend stood before him, not wounded, and 
with face of wretchedness, such as of late 
his memory had been haunted with, but 
with look of heavenly peace and kindness. 
Woodreeve knew this image was only in 
his fancy ; yet, as the sounds went by, it 
seemed to stand more clearly there, and 
to smile on him with so benign a feeling, 
as imparted hope and comfort to his heart. 
He wept, but not in suffering sorrow ; 
his tears were now such as hush the mind 
in deepest stillness, and strengthen and 
refresh it, like as the dew of heaven the 
withered herb. 

The day of this great tournay, to which 
the King had invited lords and gentils, 
far and wide, was now come ; and all was 
bustle and expectation in the castle and 
country rovmd. It was a pleasant day 
to behold, and most fresh and sweet was 
the forest-air to those, who came prancing 
through it, and delightsome were those 





shades of green and red and orangetawney, that over canopied the way, and 
seemed in stately mournfulness to bid 
farewell to summer. The redbreast, piping his lonely song amongst the leaves, 
seemed to have stolen their livery, and 
hardly could he be distinguished from the . 
beechen bough, on which he sat. Thus 
stood the beech, the ehn and chesnut, the 
slender ash, and lordly plane. Not so, 
with mark of past prime, stood the oak ; 
warrior of winter — he yet stretched forth 
his mighty limbs, clad in strong verdure, 
to defy frost and storm, and, when he 
should doff it, to brave, in his crimson 
surcoat, even old Yule, when, with shrill 
whistle OR the slrarp north, he should 
come to scatter snows on his tawney crest. 
It were most soothing now to melancholize under these shades, and think on 
many things in air and earth, real and 
unreal, that fly the liglitsome noon ; and 




thus might you ruminate, till time should 
bring you to the verge of your part in it, 
without your perceiving, that he was carrying you on your way, all reckless of its 
better use ; so stilly would it move beneath 
this quiet gloom. But those, who passed 
through the forest-tracks this day, went 
with the swift foot of hope and high spirits ; they came not to melancholize : and 
a greater number of coursers, palfries, hobbies, and other steeds never, ywis, tramped 
on the ground of Ardenn. 

Ever since the first dawn, you might espy 
them passing among the woods from towns, 
and villages and hamlets and monasteries, 
whither they had gathered over-night; and 
now drawing on towards Kenilworth, and 
the castle, where, over the great gate, hung 
the helmet of invitation to all courteous 
knights, a summons not slighted by any, 
whether courteous and knightly, or humbly




and civilly curious, or rude and forward. 

It was in a fair meadow, which some 
call a plain, below the castle, on the opposite side of the moat, that this tournament was appointed ; as a place where the 
Queen and her ladies might behold it from 
the castle, if the autumn weather should 
forbid them to be present : but all that 
great space was prepared and set forth 
at the sides, with tents, and stages, and 
galleries, as if nought might keep them 
away ; the whole hung with arras, or cloth 
of gold. These you might see from the 
towers and walls of the castle ; nay, from 
the bay-window of the great hall, standing 
like a little town of palaces and castles ; 
for so were many of the tents, fashioned 
in the midst of the woods, which rose up 
on all sides, around them, save where the 
lake spread its broad light to the foot of 
 





the Swan Tower and the rampart-walls : 
and, certes, it was a noble sight to see 
those pavilions ranged around the open meadow, all amongst the green shades, with 
vanes and banners glittering in the sun, 
spreading to the very edge of the water, 
which there lay, smooth and bright as polished silver, and giving back this glorious vision. 

And then again, to those in the field 
the castle itself was a goodly sight, with 
all its towers and battlements thronged 
with faces ; the great banner of England, 
waving on the Keep, and over-topping 
even the forest-trees behind ; the whole 
pictured forth on those sleeping waters, as 
if falling into the blue deep below. Every 
parapet, or tower, or rampart, where foot 
could stand, or arm could cling, was clothed with living forms, and every window 
and little grate was full of watching eyes, 
and showed shoulder beyond shoulder, and 


 

head crowding over head, looking towards 
the field, with an eagerness, that made 
all below, who had seen them, turn their 
eyes the same way, and feel yet a stronger 
eagerness for the spectacle they were expecting. Even behind the loop-holes there 
were faces ; some of them, I w^een, such 
as had never looked out there before ; the 
darts of these warriors not being in their 
hands, but in their eyes. 

Those in the castle could hear the 
trumpets blow up amain, and see the heralds on their great horses riding about 
the place of contest, before the knights 
appeared ; and could clearly discern the different tents, and make out to whom each 
belonged. The king's pavilion of scarlet cloth of gold was raised on a platform, 
above every other, and stood in the centre 
of that half- circle, formed by the rest. 
The platform was covered with silken 
carpets ; and there, in front of the pavi


 

lion, but just within the canopy, were 
placed two state-chairs for their Highnesses. The curtains were drawn up in 
large folds, held up with golden ropes ; and 
within them were showed seat above seat, 
filled with ladies of the court, gorgeously apparelled, awaiting the royal train : 
and below, on either hand, were ranged 
esquires and pages in the King's livery. 
Over this tent played the royal banner ; 
and the vanes showed the King's crest, 
glittering almost as high. 

On the right of this was the pavilion of 
the young Prince Edward ; but his was 
raised only by a few steps above the turf. 
It was of gi'een and white silk, not in 
any feigned fashion, but in that, which 
belongeth to tents in war ; and it had 
a golden lion on the top for a vane. On 
the left of the King's pavilion, raised 
only one step from the turf, was that 
appointed for the great officers of state. 

 

when they were dismissed from standing 
about his Highness's chair ; and for other 
nobles of the realm, with whom were 
some bishops, but not in their state, though 
the King were present ; and some abbots, 
also not in their state. Near this was the 
tent of the Baron de Blondeville, of white 
and azure, having for the crest an armed 
hand with a javelin poised in it, ready to 
strike at a shield. 

It were tedious to teU of aU the different pavilions and galleries, adorned with 
velvets and rich tapestries, that spread so 
gloriously round this fair meadow ; or of 
the ladies, so sumptuously arrayed, that 
appeared within, dehghting the hearts of 
all who beheld them. 

But the tent of the challengers, whose 
chief was William de Fortibus, Earl of 
Amnerle, standing at the eastern barrier ; 
and that of the defenders, whose leader 
was the Lord Simon de Montfort, nierh 



 





the western barrier, deserve notice. The 
Earl of Aumerle's was shaped like a castle, beset with gilded turrets and bastions, 
the entrance gate showing a lofty arch, 
hung round with goodly trappings of 
purple velvet, 'broidered and fringed with 
gold ; and having within, hangings and 
seats of the same. But my Lord of Montfort's outdid this glittering pomp; his 
tent was in shape of a princely palace, 
yet with walls and towers, approaching 
in some sort to a castle. The entrance 
was into a bannered hall, with stately 
crimson and gold beneath the banners ; 
and of crimson and gold were the seats 
and cushions. Figures in armour stood 
round that hall, as though he would assert 
himself a warrior and a prince ; and truly 
King Henry needed such, if he might 
find them true to him. 

The lists were forty feet wide, and they 
ran nearly the whole length of the field. 





On the outside of them was a raised 
space to keep off the crowd, which was 
guarded by knights and their esquires, in 
armour, but bearing no weapons ; and 
so, too, were the barriers guarded. These 
knights, as well as all the attendants of 
the combatants, had taken an oath not 
to assist either by word, look, or gesture, 
any of the combatants, not even when 
wounded and vmhorsed, except as the 
Marshal of the Field should allow ; but 
this oath was not on pain of death, as at 
trial by combat, in law. 

The eastern barrier was for the entrance of the challengers, with the ladyprize ; the western was for the defenders. At these points of the field were the 
greatest press and throng of the people ; 
amongst whom, to wile away their time of 
waiting, ran many stories of the deeds of 
some of the knights expected. 

Anon, the heralds, who were riding 





about the place of war, drew aside to the 
harriers, and their trumpets blew up aloud 
for a long space, summoning the lords and 
knights, challengers and defenders, to the 
field, in manner of war, with such a stiring sound, that no man could abide in 
the castle, that thought he could get one 
foot into the field of tournay; but all ran 
speedily thither, not one allowing, in spite 
of eye-sight, that it was impossible to find 
the smallest space, not already filled. And 
then many, that had been on the walls, 
would fain have been back there again, 
for scarcely a glimpse could they get of the 
field; the fencing, the i3ikemen, and the 
horsemen being so deep around it, that 
the nearest to them had but a sorry peep. 
And, as for the stages and galleries, raised 
up for those, who came first, or who had 
some favour, they had been filled for 
hours, some having taken their seats there 
at sun-rise. 





Presently, the heralds were answered 
by the King's trumpets afar, which drew 
near and nearer, until they came into the 
plain, and took their station before the 
King's pavilion, still blowing up, with 
their banners displayed. There, rode two 
King's at arms. Garter and Clarencieux : 
then was every eye turned thither in 
expectation of what might follow ; and 
presently came into theii' tent the King 
and Queen, with a long train of nobles, 
and ladies, and took their seats on the 
chairs prepared for them, standing a little 
out on the platform. 

His Highness, this day, wore armour, and 
was attended by the four esquires of the 
body. His helmet, with the vizor open, 
was circled with a crown, surmounted by 
a crescent, encompassing a blazing star. 

The Queen was in purple and palle, and 
on her head she wore a crown of jewels. 
The Lady Cornwall, her sister, was cere

 

inoniously apparelled with a coronet of 
pearls ; as was the Lady Pembroke-Montfort, her sister, whose lord was, this day, 
to enter the lists. All the ladies present 
were ceremoniously attired, with fillets 
in their hair, or garlands, each according 
to her rank. And amongst those who 
stood by the Queen's chair, none looked 
more lovely than the young Baroness de 
Blondeville ; her head was circled with 
costly pearls, and she wore a thin scarf of 
silver azure, drawn over her breast, the 
colour of her lord's banner. 

Soon as the King and Queen were 
placed, the trumpets at the barriers sounded a charge, and a great many of nobles 
and knights entered the field. Amongst 
them was the young Prince Edward ; for 
he liked not to ride alone, in the order 
that had been settled for him, but came 
in pesle-mesle with the rest, and so busy 
with his mettlesome steed, that he noticed 





not the observance which, nathless all the 
hurly-burly, was paid to him by those, who 
rode near him. 

Cased in complete armour and mounted 
on a brave charger, he came, accompanied 
by his brother Edmund, a noble youngster, 
apparelled in mail, to witness the disport, 
though not to share it ; sorely against his 
will was Prince Edward restrained from 
trying to break a lance this day. His 
heart beat high for martial deeds. The 
King and the Queen joyed to see him sit 
his horse as manfully, as did any knight in 
the field ; and the Queen, although it was 
by her especial command that he forbore 
to try his skill with others of his age, 
looked on him, with even more dehght 
than his father. In him she might have 
foreseen the corrector of such insults as 
were afterwards given to her by the citizens of London, when, by hurling of 
stones at her from the bridge, as she was 





flying by water from the tower, almost 
for her very life, they stayed her for a 
time, from her purpose of repairing to 
the palace at Sheen. And in him too she 
might have foreseen the queller of rebellion, the corrector of abuses, the restorer of general order, the enactor of \\ Ise 
laws, the administrator of justice, the 
mighty ruler, who, by his wisdom and vigorous perseverance, bound up the wounds 
of his country, strengthened its sinews, 
and pruned away its exuberant vices, 
which the tyranny and weakness of King 
John had by turns provoked and encouraged ; and which the incapacity of Henry 
had suffered to engraft them. selves on and 
to encumber almost every useful institution. 

This young Prince, in whose character 
yet lay hid the virtues which were hereafter to restore the kingdom, now came 
into the field with high spirits ; and, hav




ing paid his duty before the King's pavilion, took his station. Perchance, it was 
with remembrance of his delight in this 
toumay, that, in after-times, when he hisself was King, he caused that magnificent feast of chivalry to be enacted here, 
which brought a hundred knights and as 
many ladies to give more fame to Kenilworth, for, they trooped to that festival 
from all parts, even from over sea, to witness its splendours and to increase them : 
yet did he not, I ween, delight so much in 
that, as in this present, now before his 
eyes, when all was new to them and wore 
the gloss of his own youth. 

Soon after Prince Edward had so placed 
himself, the Baron de Blondeville appeared; and none came on with a more gallant 
air, (the white plume depending aside his 
cap to show the easy sway, with which 
he adapted himself to the curvetings of 
his managed horse,) or rose on his stirrups 





with more courageous grace than he ; and 
the whispers and smiles of the ladies seemed to say this : the young Baroness, proud 
of his affection, and of his distinction, 
looked on, with beating heart and with 
tearful smile. Having paid reverence to 
the King and Queen, his banner was 
bowed also before his bride, and he saluted her with a homage, that seemed to say 
he was ambitious only to prove himself 
worthy of her love. 

In this magnificent show, it was a question, which most excelled in gorgeous 
array, or seemed most proudly conscious, 
the knights, the ladies, or the coursers. 

And now the trumpets, without the 
barriers, sounded a charge ; for the challengers drew nigh the field, and were 
answered by others already there. Then 
it was, that neither Prince Edward nor 
his steed could longer endure restraint, 
Fo that both set off full tilt, coursing the 





plain, round and round, with most courageous bearing, the latter prancing, curveting, bounding, to the great joy of all, 
who beheld him, save the Queen. Her 
Highness, though herself of good courage 
and well skilled, for her sex, to manage 
her horse, feared he would be thrown headlong from his charger, while he rejoiced, 
with firm hand and steady eye, to urge, 
to watch and to command the strength 
and spirit of the noble animal. 

A loud murmur of applause ran from 
tent to tent and from tower to tower, 
afar ; and then might it be said the warlike people began to feel for their Prince 
the affection and respect, which hereafter 
assisted him to rule them. Where this 
curveting would have ended, none knew, 
for, the Prince was nothing weary, had 
not the appearance of the challengers 
at the barrier checked his career, when 
he turned slowly towards the King's tent. 





sitting his charger with a proud negligence, as he looked back on the approaching knights. 

Now, the Lord Marshall of the field, 
the Earl of Norfolk, riclily appareUed in 
arms, and with his truncheon in his hand, 
riding a brave horse, right bravely trapped, and attended by his king at arms, 
heralds and poursuivants, rode up to the 
eastern barrier, and, in the King's name, 
demanded of the champion, abiding there, 
completely armed, whence he came, who 
he was, and the cause of the grief that 
brought him hither tlms clad in steel. 

To Avhich he made answer, his herald, 
with his banner, standing at his side. 
" I am William de Fortibus, Earl of 
Aumerle;" and then he delivered his 
challenge, engrossed on embossed vellum, 
in which he defied to arms any one, who 
should deny the peerless beauty of his 
lady-love. Then the Lord Marshall made 

 

him undo his vizor, that it might appear 
he had rightly called himself; which being 
done, the knights, his aids, did the same. 
Then was administered to the champion 
and all his followers the oath, that they 
came not armed with any spell, or word, 
or other instrument of magic, but with 
lawful arms only. After which, the knights 
of the Lord Mareschal and those, who 
guarded the lists, took oath also, not to 
assist either champion, during single combat, by word, look, or gesture. 

This ended, the Earl of Hereford, High 
Constable of England, who stood by with 
his staff of office, ordered the barrier to 
be thrown open ; and forthwith the herald 
of the champion, attended by his poursuivants, to the number of four, entered 
the lists, the herald bearing his banner, 
and standing aside, where he proclaimed, 
with potent voice, the name and titles 






of his lord, and whereupon he came 
hither in array. 

Having done this, he threw down the 
gauntlet, and advanced to the tree of honour, where he placed the written words of 
the challenge on a bough, and where also 
were suspended the shielded arms of aJl 
the knights, who, this day, meant to run 
their course of chivalry on the field. Then 
straight the Earl of Aunierle and his followers were admitted to the field, bearing 
up the King's flag, nearly in the state 
and order as here set down. First, came, 
in solemn march, eight trumpeters, four 
abreast, blowing up amain, in their yellow 
tabards and high caps, their banner rolls 
displayed ; then cornets, drums and clarioners, in warlike fashion. Then came 
twelve knights armed, two and two, on 
foot. Next came the banner of the King's 
Highness, carried by a knight completely 





armed, and borne up by four other knights 
armed, but bareheaded, each having his 
two shield-knaves (now called by most, 
shield-bearers, or esquires) beside him, 
carrying his spear, shield and helmet. 
Then followed eight knights, appointed 
like the first, each wdth his two knaves, 
bearing his helmet and shield ; then forty 
yeomen, in doublets of scarlet and gold, 
bearing their partizans upright, their coats 
broidered with a golden Hon and the 
King's crown above, surmounted with a 
crescent and blazing star. Then followed 
two score of demi-lances, four and four. 

Next came four trumpeters on horsehack, blowing up ; then four esquires ; 
then a herald at arms ; then the banner 
of the Lord Mareschal, borne high by a 
knight armed, four esquires walking beside 
it. Then appeared the Lord Mareschal 
his-self in complete harness, mounted on 





a barbed steed, right nobly and gorgeously 
trapped, with crimson velvet, embossed 
with gold and the shielded arms of his 
lord ; esquires and pages going beside and 
following. 

Then came, in separate order, the 
champion's five knights, his aids, armed 
cap-a-pe, mounted on goodly coursers, richly trapped, each having his banner borne 
before him, and four trumpeters blowing 
up; also with esquires and pages in his 
livery. 

The Earl was cased in gorgeous armour, bossed with silver and laid in with 
gold. His helmet bore a scarlet plume 
and, for his crest, a winged griffin of solid 
gold, as were the bars of his vizor. The 
head-piece and breast-plate of his steed 
were bossed in like manner, as was the 
shaffroone and crivet for the neck ; and the 
high pummels of his saddle were also edged 
with gold. Over this lord was borne by 





Four esquires on horseback, wearing his 
livery, a silken canopy, the colours of his 
tent, fringed also with gold and surmounted by his crest, in silver. 

And now were heard sounds of sweet 
minstrelsy, and, immediately following the 
champion, came the minstrels and the 
lady-prize, seated in a chair, covered with 
crimson cloth of gold of Florence, having 
a canopy of crimson silk, bearing a white 
plume, which played upon the air, and 
drawn by four milk-white harts, for so 
they seemed. Each was led by a page 
apparelled in rose-coloured silk, striped 
with gold, and holding in his hand his cap 
of velvet, wreathed with roses, and laced 
with gold. Their buskins were all of 
swan-down white as snow. These milkwhite harts had their horns tipped with 
gold and hung with roses, with chainlets 
of the same round their necks. The 
reins were of crimson silk, studded with 



 

gold and precious stones, as were the 
traces. Within this so sumptuous car sat 
the Lady Aveline de Bohun, daughter of 
the Lord Constable, the Earl of Hereford. 
She was beautiful as morning, rising from 
the sea ; her look was peace and joy. She 
wore a robe of palest silver, and her hair 
was coronetted with eglantine, in bloom, 
and with pearls, that night might have 
scattered. In front of the crimson canopy 
above her, beamed a diamond star of purest 
splendour. Four knights walked ])eside 
her car. And thus she came on to the 
sound of dulcimers and harps, with her 
maidens playing on timbrels and lutes and 
sweet bells. Ever and anon they stepped 
dancing-wise, tossing the tabors on high 
and turning . with so sweet a grace, as 
was the marvel and delight of the whole 
court ; although many present liked them 
not the better, for that they were of the 
Queen's country. Still, as this lady passed. 





welcome, peace, and joy, spread around 
her: she was called the Lady of the 
Morning Star. 

Then followed a goodly train of esquires, 
and gallant youngsters, in shining trim, 
wearing the livery of this Earl, to the 
number of twenty-live, riding on noble 
steeds ; their trappings glittering in the 
sun, and tinkling with silver bells, that 
made merriment as they advanced. After 
them forty of the Lord Aumerle's yeomen, 
on foot, appeared in his livery, with his 
badge in silver, on their sleeves. 

And thus, with proud paces, these processions passed on the field of tournament, 
till they reached the King's tent ; and 
then they halted and did homage. So fair 
and pleasant a show was never seen before 
in woods of Ardenn. The crowds on the 
castle-walls beheld the whole order of it, 
and better than many that were nearer ; 
yet were they not contented ; and often. 




as the shouts of the people mingled with 
the clangour of the trumpets, they bemoaned themselves, that they were so 
far oif. Yet those on the level of the 
field beheld not half of the show at once. 
Three times that gorgeous train moved 
round the field, to the sound of trumpets 
and other brave instruments ; never failing, each time, their homage at the King's 
tent. From the very top-most turrets, 
those there perched, could see this processioning ; the sun glittering on the armour of the knights, and glancing on their 
crests and helmets and on the heads of 
their spears, as they moved. 

They could see, when the procession 
had the third time reached the King's 
pavilion, that it rested to deliver up the 
lady-prize unto the fair company there 
assembled, to remain in safe custody, till 
the end of the tournay. They could perceive her approach the Queen, who turned 





graciously towards her, and that then 
she retired amongst the crowd of ladies, 
behind her Highness's chair. This done, 
they saw the Lord Mareschal, with four 
knights, advancing towards the centre of 
the field, in front of the grand pavilion, 
there to plant the King's great banner ; 
but they could not see every one of the 
ceremonies, that attended this, nor hear 
the chaunt of the minstrels, which accompanied each part of them, though they 
caught the swelling strain of the louder 
minstrelsy ; and on every charge of the 
trumpets and every shout of joy, did they 
set up fresh lamentation. 

" If I was but in that tree," said one, 
" how much nearer I should be." " Why 
do not you see," said another, "the branches 
are so full already they can scarcely bear 
up the people? they will break presently, 
and tumble them into the lake." " But 
look," said another " if there is not the 
 




roof of the Swan Tower, with neither 
man, woman, nor child, upon it. Oh ! if 
I was but there, I could see and hear 
every thing ; I will try for it." " You 
may as well stay, where you are," observed a fourth ; " you may be sure, if 
the roof could be reached, it would have 
been full of people long ago." 

Then would come a loud blast of the 
trumpets and a great huzza, but nobody 
could tell what it was about. " Why this is 
worse than seeing nothing at all, to be tantalized in this way," says one. Then another spies out some friend, at a distance in 
a valuable place, as he thinks, and hallooes 
out with might and main, " Can you make 
any room for me in that tree ? Do mj 
good Hodge. If you cannot, speak to 
Ralph for me ; he will, I know." Straight, 
some score of faces are turned at his 
shout, but his friend maketh not out that 
he is spoken to ; all hear him but his 
friend ; till another shout comes amain on 




the wind: "Hodge o' the Chase-side, I 
say, can you make any room for me ?" 
and then a dismal " No !" silences the noncontent, and makes those laugh, whom he 
would have left behind ; and thus they 
went on murmuring, and wasting what 
pleasure they might have had, because 
they could not have all, just like their 
betters; for thus it is in life, that we 
often employ oui' wits only to tui'n good 
to evil. 

Those below, at the castle-windows, ladies and gentlewomen, who could not get 
places in the tents, or on the galleries 
in the field, murmured too ; but not so 
much for that they could not see every 
thing there, though that seemed to be their 
grief, but that they could not their-selves 
be seen, dressed as they were in apparel, 
which they had gotten from Coventry, long 
before. They saw plainly enough knights, 
esquires and pages, prancing, or pacing, 
about the field, in all their splendour ; and 





lady-aunts and lady-cousins in the galleries, in all their sheen and joyance, and 
fain would they have shared with them. 
Some too there were, who spied out their 
knights looking towards the windows, yet 
were they unable, for the crowd there, to 
make themselves distinguished ; and some 
few there were who, often as he, that each 
esteemed, advanced, in glorious seeming, 
shrunk back, with timid glance, fearing 
lest they should be noticed. 

Above them all, perched in his prisonturret, was the poor merchant, looking 
upon this splendid field, with different 
eyes from every other that beheld it. Too 
little interest had he in what was passing there, to view it with curiosity. No 
vanity had he to make him feel the jealousy of rivalship, or the fretfulness of disappointment, where all around was pomp 
and pride, or mortification, or joy, from 
another's triumph; or aught but sense 

 

of his own misery and fond remembrance 
of his home. The weight of grievous 
evils left him no leisure to feel the pressure of small ones. How blessed would 
he have thought himself, were it possible 
for him to have considered, as disappointments and causes of murmur, any of those 
trifling circumstances, which now prevented the peace and joy of hundreds, possessing here health and liberty and prosperous estate, now looking on the same spot 
with himself! 

He had been lying on his pallet, thinking on his hard fate and on that of his 
dead friend, when first he heard the trumpets blow up, and the hum of many voices 
from walls and battlements and tents below ; and, judging this to be some pageant 
pertaining to the marriage festivities of 
his triumphant enemy, he had no heart to 
witness it. But anon, this noise of trumpets, with the heavy trampling of hoofs 





on the field and the loud ringing of the 
harness, and, at times, the shouts of the 
multitude roused him from his weighty 
sorrows ; and, looking through his little 
grate, he, perched so high in air, like a 
poor bird shut up in prison-cage, looked 
down upon that field of warlike seeming 
and princely magnificence. 

There he beheld the King's dreaded 
person, on whose single word life, or 
death, depended, sitting calmly in his estate, and right glad of heart, thoughtless 
of the suffering he now inflicted, or reckless of it, having persuaded his weak and 
willing mind it was just. There, too, he 
could distinguish the Baron de Blondeville, 
caressed and honoured by his Sovereign, 
admired by the court and loved by his 
fair bride. Then, as the memory of all 
that had passed in the woods beyond, returned to Woodreeve, his very heart bled, 
while he beheld, as he too well believed, 





the guilty author of his woe, standing 
ainongst honourable men and gallant combatants, attended by a noble train, and 
ready to achieve the fame of noble deeds 
in arms. 

Now, the challenger and his five knights, 
dii-ected by the Lord Constable and Lord 
Mareschal, having planted the King's banner in the centre of the field, the Earl of 
Norfolk delivered unto each his lance, and 
they withdrew to the Tree of Honour, 
standing on a little hillock, raised near the 
King's pavilion and bearing on its boughs 
the shields of all the knights, who offered 
themselves, this day, for the lists. There 
they pointed to the words of the challenge, 
which having done, they retii-ed in procession to the eastern barrier, where their 
tent and the empty car of the lady-prize 
stood, there to await the appearance of 
the defenders. And not long did they 
wait, ere they heard the trumpets sound




ing without the western barrier, which 
were well answered by those within, and 
straight appeared the chief defender, 
with his five knights, all clad in white 
harness. These, having passed through 
the same ceremonies, as had been already 
performed by the challengers, and a herald 
having proclaimed the name of their chief 
in the field, having hung his words of 
defiance on the tree of honour, and taken 
up the gauntlet of the champion, their 
procession entered. 

And here it were tedious to set down 
all the particular splendours and doings 
of it ; but some things may be told, both 
to be a record of certain remarkable appearances and also to show some traces of 
the characters of the chief persons, who 
played their part in this pageant. 

The chief of the defenders, as has already been rehersed, was the Lord Simon 
de Montfort, the same whom the King's 





Highness had created Eaii of Leicester, 
and on whom he had bestowed his widowed sister, the Countess of Pembroke, with 
this his stately castle and wide domain 
of Kenilworth ; how worthily it needs 
not for this history to declare, since it is 
known to all, that he armed this very 
fortress against his King and benefactor. 
He, this day, wore on his scarf the Lady 
Pembroke's colour, and he was in truth 
her champion ; his five knights were Sir 
Stephen de Segrave, Sir John de Plesset, 
Sir William de Cantalupe, Sir Robert de 
Grendon, and Sir Osbert d'Abrissecourt, 
a foreign man. 

And, first of these, after heralds at 
arms, duely appointed, esquires and pages 
in pairs, and, after his raised banner, all in 
form and order much like to the procession 
of the challengers, came Sir Stephen de 
Segrave. He was on a stately charger, 
trapped with flame-coloured velvet, bossed 





with his arms and hung round with Uttle 
lions, in silver, such being his crest ; his 
horse white and heavy, with broad chest, 
whose head-stalls and bridles were studded 
with precious stones. The lion on his 
helmet was rampant, and his plume and 
scarf of flame colour. Four esquires walked beside him, followed by four pages ; 
leading spare coursers. Then came twentyfive gentlemen, clad in the colour of his 
scarf and having also flame-coloured plumes 
in their caps. Fifty of his yeomen, apparelled in the same hue, but of different 
fashion, followed; and a crowd of his servants closed his pageant. He was of lofty 
stature and surpassing strength, and moved 
upon the field with looks of sullen pride. 
Some present augured not well from this, 
and indeed his pride was so plain, that 
King Henry liked it not. 

Next came Sir John de Plesset, Earl of 
Warwick, of most graceful person and de-' 





meanour, though he v>'as a stranger, being 
Earl of Warwick only by right of his wife, 
who was sole heiress of that house and 
by the King's courtesy. He was mounted 
on a noble roan, whose breast-plate was 
chased with silver ; and he was most gallantly caparisoned. His plume and scarf 
were of rose-colour, and the crest on his 
helmet was a leopard. He came attended 
by a brave show of esquires and gallants, 
with a train of fifty ,yeomen, besides forty 
servants, all in his livery of the colour of 
his scarf, and making a most stately show. 
Then came Gaston, the young Baron 
de Blondeville, who had changed his cap 
for a helmet, and was duely caparisoned, 
as a knight ; for, his shield, which the 
King had caused to be replaced in the hall, 
had not again been challenged, nor had 
any one made complaint to the Lord 
Mareschal against him. He rode so fiery 
a charger as hardly might be restrained. 





within the pace of dignity; yet, being 
curbed with his hand, he moved with 
proud and stately steps, well suited to his 
lord and master, who kept his seat, with 
gracious ease and looks of happy triumph, 
knowing he was admired of all, who saw 
him. His banner was well carried before 
him. Four esquires were at his side, and 
four pages, leading spare steeds, followed. 
Twenty-four gentlemen succeeded, and a  
goodly train of yeomen and servants, all in 
his livery of light blue and silver, brought 
up the rear. His plume and scarf were 
of azure, but not of the fullest hue, and his 
train of pages and servants, in the gallant 
fashion of their apparel, were outdone by 
none. 

When he came opposite to the King's 
pavilion and paid his homage, his courser, 
whether he was frightened at aught he saw, 
or that he gloried in the loud noise of the 
King's trumpets, or that he was secretly 





goaded for the purpose, began to curvet 
and play off such high tricks, as terrified 
the Lady Baroness sitting there. But, 
after he had gone through certain paces 
and high threatenings, the Baron the 
while commanding him with unmoved 
countenance, he fell into a gentle mood, 
and followed, with due order, in this 
pageant chivalry. 

And now came a knight in most curious device, riding upon what seemed to 
be a red dragon, conducted by one personating a giant, as he might well do, who bore 
in his hand a spear of immense size, which 
incontinently he applied to the dragon's 
throat, which forthwith sent forth fire and 
smoke, to the great diversion and delight 
of all beholders. Following him, a page 
led his courser richly caparisoned, and he 
was compassed all about with brave gallants and followers. This was no other 
than Sir William de INIowbray, who at all 





times, was fond of mirth, and certes, he 
caused much ; for, on his displaying himself, tents and walls and battlements and 
turrets, nay, the very trees, up to top-most 
bough, sent forth peals of joy and laughter. He was much beloved of the crowd, 
and well liked in the court, none envying him. 

Next came Sir Hugh de Bois, mounted 
on an iron grey. His plume and scarf were 
of orange colour, and he was not wholly 
wanting in esquires and servants to fill 
up his estate ; yet was he far from being 
on a par with the rest,, his means being 
much smaller. So, I say not more of his 
appearance, seeing he made not much, 
when compared with others, on that 
day ; only this I will add, he was of a 
most compassionate and honest nature ; 
and might have vied with the rest, if he 
would have pressed harder upon his de




pendants, or would have mortgaged his 
lands, as so many did, to the Jews. 

Next and last, came the chief of the 
defenders, the Lord Simon de Montfort, 
in his estate, under a fair pavilion of silk, 
with turrets and battlements shaped hke 
unto a castle, his banner flying over all. 
This was carried along by six stout men ; 
but it appeared to be borne by a multitude of his servants, in purple jerkins of 
silk, laced with gold. His charger, trapped in purpled velvet, bossed with his 
ai-ms in gold, was led by pages ; and its 
frontlet and breast-plate were so brightly 
burnished, that, as the sun shone on them, 
the splendour cast around him was enough 
to dazzle, if it could not daunt, any knight, 
his adversary. And this was made ground 
of comi)laint against him by his first adversary in the lists ; so that, when he began to place himself for combat, he was 





commanded by the Lord Marescbal not 
to advance against the sun ; but, in the 
changes and shiftings of the struggle, this 
command availed but little. Squires and 
gallants and pages followed almost without number. 

Of kingly purple were the Lord Simon's 
plume and scarf; and his golden helmet 
seemed one blaze of light. He bore himself with a most lofty carriage ; looking 
as though he thought none, but the King's 
Highness, might compare with him, and 
hardly that either. Not more audacious, 
I guess, could he have looked, when, in 
after-times, he traitorously gave his Sovereign Lord the He, in the field at Evesham ! and there paid with his life for his 
ingratitude and rebellion. 

Little weened King Henry now, when 
he saw before him this knight, arrayed in 
the pomp of chivalry, that he beheld one, 
who would hereafter turn his arms against 


 




him, excite his subjects into rebellion, and 
lead him prisoner through his own kingdom, untn his Ufe and liberty should be 
rescued by his brave son, Edward, here 
beside him. Little weened his Highness 
of this, or he would not have raised him 
to highest honour ; bestowing upon him 
that sister, who had withdrawn herself to 
convent-life, and taken the veil, but not 
yet the ring, that would have wedded 
her to it ; else not even the Pope his-self 
might have sent her dispensation. Happier had she been in her peaceful cloister 
than living in the world, with so proud, 
yet base a spirit, that could walk in arms 
against the Sovereign, who had lavished 
favours on him with so lavish hand. Yet 
were there some near his Highness's chair, 
who, from what they saw this day, could 
guess something of what high favours 
might work in him ; the venerable Archbishop was one of these. 




 

The defenders having passed in solemn 
pomp, three times, round the field, paying, 
each time, due homage at the King's pavilion, their chief received from the Lord 
Mareschal his lance, which had been duly 
measured with that of the chief challenger, and his shield from the Tree of 
Honour ; and then the defenders withdrew to the western barrier, and took station before their own tent, till the summons of war should sound. 

They waited not much, ere the trumpets blew up a charge loud and long, 
which set the hoofs of every steed in motion to prance and curvet, with proud 
impatience for the onset, so that hardly 
could the knights, whose turn was not 
yet come, rein in their arched necks. 
Then the Lord Constable of England, and 
the Lord Mareschal rode gravely round 
the lists, to see that all was right and in 
due order ; and examined again the lances 





of the two chiefs, who, upon the second 
charge of the trumpets, advanced each 
from his station, near the barriers, and, 
each crying out aloud the word of combat 
given him by his lady, they ran together 
furiously. 

The Lord Simon first brake his lance 
upon the Earl of Aumerle, shivering it 
into splinters, and with the blow making 
the Earl stagger on his courser. It was 
the marvel of all, that he fell not ; but, 
adroitly recovering himself, he passed the 
sword-guard of the Lord Simon, and struck 
him on the chest, with a force, that made 
his armour flash fire, shivered his own 
lance into a thousand pieces, and had nigh 
brought his enemy, both man and horse, 
to the ground. Then the trumpets sounded, for victory, the cries of the people 
cheered him, and a murmuring sound of 
many voices rose from the King's pavilion. 

A second round was run by these chiefs 
 





with lances duly delivered to them, while 
tumultuous shoutings from the more distant spectators on the castle walls and 
towers and on the trees encouraged them, 
those nearer being kept in order by the 
laws of the field, which forbade any to 
make sign by word, or deed, during the 
time of combat. But the knights, who, 
in armour, kept the lists, found it no easy 
task to preserve silence there ; for, as the 
fate of the battle swayed, so was the clamour of hope, or joy, ever ready to break 
forth ; and it was well these knights carried not arms, lest they might have been 
provoked to turn them against the unruly 
people around them. Those afar off, on 
the walls, being beyond the reach of the 
laws, seemed to shout forth in very bravado, as if to revenge themselves by liberty of voice, for that which was denied them of a better view. And how incessantly they did peal forth, sending out 


 



 



all the signs they could to either combatants, and calling loudly a " Fortibus/' or 
a " Montfort," followed by hooting, or applause, just as their humours chanced! 

The combat of these chiefs lasted, till 
each had broken on other several lances, 
but was at last decided, in favour of William de Fortibus, who unhorsed the Lord 
Simon and broke his shield. 

Then was victory proclaimed by the 
heralds, to strains of minstrelsy, the name 
and titles of the victor being repeated, on 
every pause of the music, with these words, 
" Renown to heroes and to the sons of heroes." Immediately there rose from the lists 
cries of joyous triumph, and the woods 
resounded, far and wide, with the multitude of voices proclaiming the conqueror's name and " Renown to heroes." Convents, buried in the wilds of the forest, 
opened theu' gates, and let forth the startled monks, to listen to " Renown to he




roes." Never had they heard such sounds, 
till then. Travellers from far, journeying through the forest and hearing such 
sounds of joy and triumph, where they 
expected only lonesome silence, or the 
joy of birds, looked round, on all sides, 
under the boughs ; but, seeing nothing, 
save the sun-light, and the farther woods, 
that close them in, they feared this might 
be some witchery to deceive them. Coming, perchance, to village, or hamlet, of the 
forest, they ask what mean these sounds, 
of aged men, or little children, the only 
inhabitants left there, and whose opposite 
extremes of life alike disabled them from 
following to Kenilworth. And then, having learned somewhat near the truth, the 
travellers urge their weary hobbies over 
deep roads, at the risk of their necks, that 
they may come in for a glimpse of the spectacle of chivalry. So they leave behind 
these lonesome cottagers to the quietness. 





which (ah ! ungrateful man !) they now 
think dreary, and would fain exchange for 
the many pains of another entrance into 
crowded life ; the distant shouts tantalize 
the curiosity of the young, and bring back 
the regrets of the aged ; the old man reflecting on his long-past youth, and the 
child anticipating his, when he shall no 
longer be left at home, while his elder 
brothers go to fairs and to Kings' tournaments. 

These shoutings of the multitude and 
the clamour of "Renown to heroes," recalled to his prison-bars the poor merchant, who, on sight of the Baron de Blondeville, prancing in procession amongst the 
defenders, had, In the bitterness of his 
heart, withdrawn and thrown himself on 
his pallet, there to calm his throbbing 
spirit. Returned to the barred window, 
he there beheld that, which he could not 
well understand, not having witnessed the 





combat. This was William de Fortibus 
courteously returning his lance to the 
Lord de Montfort, together with the golden chain of his mistress, which he had 
worn on his shield in combat ; at which 
rose up fresh shoutings of applause, but 
both were received by the vanquished with 
a very ill grace ; and his countess might 
rejoice that she was not known to have 
bestowed this chain upon a conquered 
knight. 

This ended, the chiefs withdrew, each 
to his own tent, and then advanced four 
knights, two of each party, and ran their 
coiu'ses together. They combated with 
strong spears, of great breadth, and ran 
with most courageous skill, to the wonder 
of all beholders. It were hard to say, until the very last, which of the four most 
excelled ; but then, at last, one knight of 
each party bore away the prize, worn on 
the helmet, or shield, of his adversary, to 





whom it had been given by the lady of his 
love. 

Next advanced to single combat the 
Baron de Blonde ville and Sir Robert de 
Grendon. On sight of the Baron, Woodreeve turned from his grate, and his heart 
sickened to behold the assassin appear 
before the whole court and the multitude 
of the people, arrayed for triumph, or, at 
least, for honour. Yet might it not be so ; 
for, the triumph, and even the honour 
might attend his adversary. It was, however, long before such possibility occurred 
to Woodreeve ; soon as it did, he resolved 
to abide the sight of the contest, yet were 
his fears much stronger than his hopes. 

And now the trumpets blew up the 
field, and the onset began. They fought 
with spears, and such Avas the shock of 
the first encounter, that both knights were 
nearly unhorsed. At the second course, 
the Baron brake his spear on his opponent. 





At the third course, Sir Robert shivered 
his on the Baron's shield. Then, they ran 
with lances, or long spears, and the shock, 
with which they met, brought both combatants to the ground. The Baron quickly recovered himself, and, as some thought, 
made a blow at his adversary, ere he was 
fully risen. On this, there was a great 
outcry, and the Lord Mareschal rode up, 
and stood before the King's tent, but said 
nought. Then, the King commanded, that 
the combat should proceed. On this, there 
was a murmur of discontent ; but, each 
knight being now remounted, it did accordingly proceed. Some said Sir Robert 
had received the Baron's blow on his 
head ; others said it had missed him ; 
Woodreeve now, as he watched, thought 
he sat not steadily on his courser. 

However this might be, his horse tournayed, and passed with him along the 
lists, to meet the Baron, like unto a glance 





of lightning. The Baron, now well prepared to meet him, sustained the shock, 
and the combat was renewed with such 
force, as though it were but just begun. 
It lasted not long. Sir Robert seemed to 
support himself with difficulty, and sometimes almost to stagger on his steed ; and, 
at the last course, he sank beneath the 
Baron's blow, and fell to the earth. Then 
he was borne away to his tent, and his 
armour unbraced, and the tale went, that 
he had been hurt unfairly. 

The Baron, having snatched from the 
shield of his enemy his mistress's pledge 
of favour, a tress of her hair, bore it triumphantly on the point of his lance unto 
the King's tent, where sat with the 
Queen the Lady Baroness, his wife, and 
presented it to her. When their Highnesses 
said many gracious things to the victor, 
and many noble ladies there assembled 
testified their joy no less. Then was his 





name proclaimed, as victor, by the heralds, 
and his song of triumph chaunted round 
the King's banner. 

The poor merchant, from his turret, 
seeing how matters went, and that nought 
but applause and honour seemed to follow 
the steps of him, who, in justice, deserved 
only shame and punishment, felt as if his 
last hope was gone. His pang of sorrow 
was at the uttermost. He turned from 
his grate, sickening even at the pleasant 
light of the sun, and once more he threw 
himself upon his pallet. 

But why do the trumpets now blow up 
so loud a charge, so shrill and dread, that 
all, which went before, was sleep and silence in comparison of it? No shoutings 
mingled with this charge, nor was any 
other sound heard contending with it in 
the vault of the sky, where it rolled alone. 
So long it lasted, that it roused the pri




soner again from his pallet, and recalled 
him to the window. 

Thence beheld he, in the field below, 
not among the combatants, but among the 
spectators there, an extraordinary turmoil, 
and a sort of solemn, or fearful, curiosity, 
very different from that which they had 
before showed. Their faces were all turned one way, that was towards the place 
whence the sounds came, which was not 
from the heralds at arms. In all the tents 
the company were standing up, but none 
there, or in spots more exposed to his 
view, seemed satisfied, that they knew 
what was going forward. On the place of 
combat, the prisoner saw only the Lord 
Mareschal and the Constable of England 
riding about, and the heralds gathering at 
the barriers, to answer the summons (of 
which it seemed there would not, for a 
long time, be an end), and the knights. 





who kept the lists, watching for one to 
enter. 

At last, Woodreeve saw, at the eastern 
barrier, a knight enter, armed cap-a-p, 
mounted on a black charger. There, the 
Mareschal, who was ready, demanded in 
the most urgent terms, who he was, 
whom he came to challenge, and what was 
his cause of grief? What was answered, 
those only, who stood nigh the barrier, 
might know ; but the stranger's herald 
was seen to raise a banner before the 
Mareschal's eyes, that he stood gazing on, 
like one amazed ! while the knights of 
the barriers drew eagerly round him ; 
when the Lord Mareschal again demanded, 
why he came? The knight his-self made 
a sign in the air with his lance, and held 
it raised ; and, during the wonderment, 
which this spread around, a herald, not 
waiting for order, but moved by his own 
notions and fears, admininistered to him 





the oath, that he came not armed with 
any unlawful weapons, or means of harm ; 
after which, the stranger-knight dropped 
the lance into its rest. 

The Mareschal seemed still to marvel 
and to be at a loss, how he should proceed ; but then, recollecting himself, he 
advanced close to the knight, as is the 
custom, to unclasp his visor, that it might 
appear he had spoken the truth, as to who 
he was : but he, drawing back, his-self 
unclosed it. What face the Mareschal 
discovered within, the prisoner, from his 
turret, could not know ; but he saw both 
the Mareschal and the Lord Constable 
turn aside their steeds, and the knights of 
the barrier step back ; while a tumultuous noise arose amongst the pikemen behind the barrier, as if they expected the 
stranger would attempt to retreat, and 
they intended to oppose him. 

But he showed, that he meditated not 





any such thing; for, swift as an arrow 
from a bow, he cleared the barrier ; and, 
having done so, moved upon the field of war 
gloomily and sullen, like unto a thundercloud, spreading terror as he passed. All 
the multitude of voices was hushed around 
him, and the air was so still, that nothing 
was heard but the sovmd of his charger's 
steps ; and, sometimes, the unknown trumpets sending their clangour to roll away 
amongst the woods. 

His banner was borne highly before 
him, in good state, and with ceremony of 
demeanour ; but what it displayed the 
prisoner could not, at his height, discern ; 
neither could he see the face, nor the 
crest, of the stranger. As he advanced, a 
murmuring ran through the crowd, mingled with faint shrieks ; but, when he was 
present, an interval of hushed silence followed ; as if suspense and wonder held the 
breath of every gazer. Slowly, but strait 





and with due steps, as showed an accompUshed knight, the stranger rode up to 
the King's pavilion, and there stayed his 
horse, yet making no sign nor gesture, nor 
having even his banner lowered by his 
herald. Immediately Woodreeve perceived a rising up, and some confusion in the 
pavilion ; the King motioned with his 
arm ; the Archbishop made a sign in the 
air ; some of the nobles, who stood round 
his Highness's chair, pressed forward — 
others drew back ; and those behind, seemed to move to and fro in disorder. 

The Queen and her attendants appeared no less agitated ; her Highness turned 
away her face from the stranger-knight ; 
all her ladies on the seats behind, rose up, 
and some so eagerly leaned forward, that 
they had nigh overbalanced themselves, 
and fallen do\\n to the platform. The 
Baron de Blondeville, who, after his course 
and triumph, still rested, beside the pavilion, sat fixed on his courser, with his arm 
holding his spear on high. 

Those on the field saw upon the knight's 
banner the image of a murder ; they saw, 
too, upon his black helmet, a wing of fire, 
for a crest ; but what his face was they 
knew not ; for his visor was now closed ; 
and his eyes only appeared above the 
flat bars of it ; and they, it was said by 
many of the beholders, gleamed like flame. 
Some went so far as to say, tliough they 
saw too little to warrant such guess, he 
was the same who had appeared in the 
banquet hall ; others thought not so, and 
eagerly denied it. 

On the banner was a motto, which 
greatly disturbed the King ; for, soon as 
he saw it, he called for the Lord Mareschal 
and the Lord Constable, and his own 
trumpets sounded a summons. My lords, 
the Mareschal and Constable, were still 
at the eastern barrier, the confusion there 





having detained them, and very great it 
was, though no one, at the distance of 
the King's tent, knew the cause of it, not 
a foot having stinted from that barrier of 
all, who witnessed the first turmoil, on the 
approach of this so strange an intruder. 

Every one there was either too busy, 
or too curious, to run to spread the halfknown news. Some, who had been thrust 
aside after their first glimpse, said the 
Mareschal had fallen off his charger ; 
others, that he was dead ; and others 
again, that he was held in thraldom of 
the Lord Constable, and the knights at 
the barrier ; which last was but an unlikely tale. But let this pass ; whatever 
the cause was, there he was at the time 
when the stranger-knight, advancing a 
few steps nearer to the King's pavilion, did 
make somewhat of an obeisance, and then 
held up, far as his arm could reach, before 
his Highness, a sword of strange shape, 




unknown in our tournays ; which, as some 
nigh affirmed, bore on the scabbard, in 
characters of fire, the word " Justice !" 

Whether this were so or not, on sight 
of that sword, the King was sore disturbed ; and straight commanded his Lord 
Chamberlain, who stood close behind his 
chair, to ask of the knight his name and 
style, and why he approached in so extraordinary a way. 

The knight made none other answer 
than by pointing with the same sword to 
the Baron de Blonde ville. Then, the King 
guessing him to be that secret enemy of 
the Baron, who had appeared in the festal 
hall, and that he was in league with the 
prisoner ; nay, suspecting he might possibly be that man his-self, escaped by his 
supposed potent arts, disguised also by 
them, and instigated with designs against 
the life of the Baron de Blondeville, 
promptly despatched a messenger to the 

 

Lord Constable, with orders to secure the 
stranger ; and he also privately sent one 
to know, whether the merchant was safe 
in his prison ? and again bade his trumpets sound a summons for the Mareschal 
of the field ! 

For the merchant, King Henry might 
have spared his page the trouble, and hisself have seen, with little pains, if he 
had leaned that way, tlic poor man's face 
through the grate of the turret-window, 
looking upon what was passing, in this 
place of now-disturbed pomp, and knowing 
less about it, than did his Highness, little 
as that was ; and, for the Mareschal, he 
was now leaving the barrier and slowly 
advancing over the place of war, like one 
faint, and hardly able to support himself 
on his steed. Two knights of the barrier 
followed his steps, hardly less in dismay. 

Meantime, the stranger-knight, having 
remained awhile, pointing with that sword 





to the Baron de Blond eville, who, sitting 
on his courser, upheld his spear seemingly 
without power to launch it, if he had 
been so permitted, or to advance a single 
step ; — the stranger-knight, this having 
passed, withdrew a few paces: yet he 
fled not, because of the approach of the 
Mareschal and the Lord Constable, who 
gave orders that he should be seized ; but 
stood in the place, to which he had slowly 
receded, with his lance couched and his 
shield lifted, as if he defied all attack. 

No one of those, who heard the command, had approached him ; whether they 
were withheld by fear, or by reverence; 
and, when the Lord Constable his-self indignantly rode forward, demanding why 
he thus unlawfully intruded upon the 
sports, and disturbed them, with intent 
to turn that, which was designed for recreation, into revengeful and malicious 
war, he received no answer ; but saw the 





Stranger suddenly in a distant part of the 
field, in the same attitude of defiance. 

Then was the King's anger changed 
into an ecstasy of amazement ; and, turning to address himself to the Archbishop, 
who was at his right hand, he beheld, in 
the solemn tranquillity of his countenance 
an image rather of death, than of life. It 
seemed to bear the reflexion of some awful truth ! while his eyes were directed to 
some object, which so engrossed his attention, that he appeared to be insensible, 
not only of the King's words, but of his 
presence ! His Highness, on then looking 
for that which caused such deep interest, 
beheld again the stranger-knight, on his 
charger, before the pavilion, with the 
sword again raised : where, as many say, 
appeared that word, " Justice !" in letters 
of blood, and now also the name of Gaston de Blonde ville ! 

Then the knight's visor flew open, and 



 

his Highness beheld the very countenance 
he had seen in the banquet-hall ; that 
countenance looked upon the King more 
sternly than before ; the eyes were not, 
as then, dim and melancholy, but seemed 
to shoot forth fire ; and the stranger pointed again with his sword to the Baron de 
Blondeville, who wore one, that resembled 
it in the hilt, though not in the shape, 
and who now, after having sitten so long 
motionless on his charger, dropped his 
spear ; he seemed to totter in his saddle, 
his head leaned aside, and, in the next 
moment, he swayed, and fell to the 
ground, a dead weight. The clash had 
drawn all eyes towards him, when his terrified steed, running wildly along the lists, 
conveyed to the distant spectators, some 
knowledge of the truth. His two esquires, 
and others who were near, hastened to 
his assistance, and a general consternation 
ensued. 





The King, who had not observed his 
fall, and understood not rightly the occasion of it, seeing his fiery courser fleeing 
over the place of war, guessed he had 
taken fright, and thrown his master : 
meanwhile the Lord Mareschal had ridden 
forward to secure the stranger. 

With confusion and almost palsying 
terror, the Queen and her ladies had witnessed the truth. Some swooned ; others, 
who were the least overcome, endeavoured 
to convey away the Baroness de Blondeville, who had sunk down, and was senseless ; others, on recovering from their 
first sensations, pressed forward to learn 
what might further happen ; and others 
retreated, wishing to avoid all further view 
of so distressing a spectacle. Those farther off, on the castle-walls and windows, 
who beheld this uttermost turmoil and 
consternation, washed only for wings, that 
they might fly forward into the midst of 







it; for, the vexation they had suffered 
from their ill-satisfied curiosity and their 
imperfect view of those pageants and 
courtly imitations of war, was nothing in 
comparison to that caused by this glimpse 
of truth. 

The fall of the Baron had been seen by 
the prisoner from his turret; and immediately he heard shrieks and the busy 
hum of mingled voices loud and deep : he 
saw the charger flee, and somewhat of 
the confusion in the King's pavilion ; he 
observed the Lords Mareschal and Constable riding at full speed towards it, and 
that the armed knight, who had stood 
alone before the King, was no longer there, 
yet he had not observed, which way he 
had departed, nor his herald. 

Now saw he his Highness rise up, and 
turn to leave the tent ; while his esquires 
and pages raised the Baron on a kind of 
bier, and carried him from the field. 





Then, the Queen and her ladies, supported by divers of the lords, departed as 
speedily as might be. The Earl Mareschal continued to ride about the field ; 
as did many of the knights, that those, 
who guarded it, might not think their 
duty at an end ; a double guard was 
placed at the barriers, and all was hurry, 
examination, and suspicion. His Highness, when he had understood the Baron's 
condition, conceiving that he had swooned 
in consequence of having seen and of 
having been viewed by that extraordinary 
personage, whose presence had before dismayed him, sent his physician to assist 
him ; and commanded, that strict search 
should be made for the person who had 
caused such repeated consternation. 

But, when he learned the whole truth, 
and that the Baron's life was iiTCcoverably 
lost, his grief and horror were unspeakable. He broke up the present field, and 





with all his court, save such as were left 
to assist in guarding the barriers, while 
search for the stranger was going on 
within them, quitted the scene, and withdrew to his privy-chamber, with the Archbishop and a few of those whom chiefly 
he trusted. 

That honest Prelate failed not, on this 
occasion, to give sincere and wholesome 
council ; which, though his Highness little 
liked it, he was observed not to speak 
against, at first, save that he said his 
thought, that this was no mortal business, 
but a deed of sorcery ; to which the Archbishop answered, he thought not this was an 
act of sorcery ; it might be otherwise accounted for, when an innocent man was in 
so great peril, and justice was to be brought 
on a guilty one, against whom other means 
might not prevail, before judges unfortunately prejudiced in his favour. 





At this so bold avowal of his opinion 
of the deceased Baron, whom now the 
King most sorely grieved for, and charge 
imphed of injustice in himself, his Highness became angry, and answered sharply. 
The words of the Archbishop had fallen 
upon his wounded mind, as boiling oil 
upon a wounded body, exasperating it almost to madness. When he had departed, 
one craved admission, who better knew 
how to turn the passions of this Prince to 
his own account. 

This was the Prior of Saint Mary's, 
who, having learned the fate of the unhappy Baron, came hither to provoke immediate vengeance on the poor prisoner, 
and to ensure, as he hoped, his own 
safety ; and, for that purpose, he had recourse to his old subject of sorcery. And 
he seemed so deeply to sympathize with 
the King in giief for this sudden death of 
 



 

the Baron, that his Highness Hstened to 
all he said, and was inclined to do whatsoever he entreated. The Prior urged, 
that, if speedily justice had been done 
upon the merchant, the Baron's life had 
probably been spared ; and were justice 
long deferred, another innocent life, it 
were not unlikely, might fall under his 
mischievous arts ; nay, that the life of the 
King himself might be assailed. He reminded his Highness, that he had both 
urged and dreaded the probability of what 
had happened, when he supplicated, that 
his false accuser might be punished, without delay ; nay, that the unfortunate Baron 
had his-self urged this, and, if his entreaty 
had been attended to, he had, in all likelihood, been now living. 

On this, the sorrow of the King redoubled ; he seemed to accuse himself as 
a cause of his favourite's death ; and, before the Prior left the chamber, he had 





promised to sign a warrant for the prisoner's death, bidding, that he should be 
told to prepare himself against the morrow. Then the Prior departed, grieving 
less for the Baron's fate, than rejoicing 
that his enemy would soon be destroyed. 

On learning this fatal resolution of the 
King, the Archbishop again claimed hearing ; for, he was of his Highness's council ; 
and he tried by every argument to counteract the pernicious advice that had been 
given. He could now no longer conceal 
his suspicion of the Prior ; and he entreated 
for a delay, at least, of the sentence, hoping 
that his messenger might, in the mean 
time, bring from Exeter some certain 
intelligence, on the subject of his suspicions. But the misled King, accusing 
himself bitterly for former delay, as the 
cause of the Baron's cruel end, and having 
been moreover prejudiced by the Baron, 
for his own purposes, with a notion of 





some pretended cause of the Archbishop's 
dislike of the Prior, refused now to listen 
either to remonstrance, or to entreaty. 

Sorrow and remorse, arising from a misapprehension of the truth, alone seemed 
to occupy the King, who now, with the 
intention, as he persuaded himself, of preventing further evil, was about to execute an act of injustice and stern cruelty. 
And thus it is, if kingly power pertain 
to a weak head, not carefully warned by 
early instructions against the dangers, 
which must beset all power, whether 
public or private, whether in Prince or 
subject; for, the passions are the helm, 
whereon designing men seize to steer into 
action, as they wish. And thus was pity 
now about to be made the instrument of 
cruelty. 

Prince Edward, though young, saw this 
matter more clearly than did his father ; 
and he entreated for the poor merchant ; 





nay, he even dared to express his opinion 
that he had used no unworthy arts. But 
the King was yet obdurate ; and he bade 
the Prince remember that precious ring, 
which was to render him invincible in 
battle, how it had been conveyed away 
from his secured cabinet to his enemy 
Llwellyn of Wales, who had triumphed 
accordingly. 

On this, the countenance of the Prince 
showed fiery red, and indignation sparkled 
in his eyes. " Give me an army," said the 
Prince, " that I may fight your enemies, 
and prove that ring to be not invincible." 
The King turned his eyes upon his noble 
son ; and, for the ardour of his spirit, forgave him his importunity. 

The Archbishop's brow relaxed, and his 
look dwelt long upon the Prince, with 
high benignity ; while the young Prince cast 
down his eyes, which had met those of the 
Prelate, and he felt, that to deserve such 



 

dignified approbation, he could encounter 
worse enemies, than he had spoken of. 

The King now dismissed his suitors, 
even his son, and abandoned himself to 
grief and to ill-placed remorse. But what 
was grief, like his, compared with that of 
the distracted Baroness de Blondeville? 
who, innocent herself, had loved and honoured the Baron for such as her imagination painted him, not for what, in truth, 
he was. But what, had he lived, must she 
hereafter have known him for? She must 
have known him for the perpetrator of 
that lawless apd wicked act, of which he 
was accused, and moreover for the cruel 
destroyer of domestic faith and happiness. 

A tale was yet to tell, that would have 
abolished her peace for ever, and which 
that unknown and unhappy lady, who in 
the castle-hall challenged his shield and 
then departed, could have sadly related. 
The person of that lady was here a stranger. 





but somewhat of her story had gone forth, 
and was partly understood by divers at 
the court, amongst others by Pierre, the 
Queen's minstrel, who, in her bower, had 
darkly told it on his harp, enwrapping and 
disguising truth with fiction. There the 
Baron de Blondeville had heard it, and he 
alone knew how to separate one from the 
other ; he had heard it, and with such 
consternation, that he stayed not in the 
bower to inquire how Pierre drew the line 
between them. 

On that same night, there had been also 
in the Queen's presence one distantly related to the most unhappy character in the 
minstrel's lay, and whom the guilty Baron 
then suspected of having prompted it. He 
burned to tell him so ; but he dared not, 
since that would have brought to light 
a truth, which would have ruined and disgraced him, for ever. Whether this suspicion were just, or not, is uncertain ; but 





he bore deep rancour in his heart against 
that supposed suggester of the truth, and, 
on the first opportunity, determined to 
act, as if he had full proof that insult was 
intended. 

And, this very day, he had done so, 
when, in the field of contest, he had encountered Sir Robert de Grendon, and had 
cunningly given him that dangerous wound, 
which had felled him to the ground. Those 
in the court, who knew the lady's mournful history and her relationship, though 
distant, to Sir Robert, questioned whether, 
even on his part, the encounter with the 
Baron was wholly accidental. 

Nay, some suspected, that he had forborne to appear formally as her champion, 
only because he knew, that the King 
would then forbid the combat, and that 
he should be laid in jeopardy, like unto the 
poor merchant; wherefore, they said, he 
had concerted with his kinswoman her 
challenging of the Baron's shield. All this 





well might be, but nothing certain was 
known on the subject, nor has it come to 
light, to this dajo Sii' Robert, however, 
was so sorely stricken by the Baron, that 
the King's physicians long thought his life 
in danger. 

The poor lady, his kinswoman, pined 
and died hereafter of grief and remorse 
for her own former misconduct. With 
such a husband as the Baron de Blondeville, how then could his unfortunate wife 
have known happiness ? But he died ere 
she knew him ! 

Woodreeve, who, from his prison -window, had seen the Baron fall from his 
charger, and had beheld him afterwards 
borne away from the field, knew not yet 
the whole truth ; but this sudden reverse, 
appearing like a judgment on the crimes 
of his enemy, had filled the poor merchant 
with hope, yet with a kind of solemn 
astonishment, — a sort of tranquil awe, 



which fixed him in earnest gaze at his 
grate, till all the multitude of the people 
round the grand plain, in gallery, tent, or 
on tree, on coursers, on hobbies, or on battlements, had dispersed and vanished away, 
like cloudy freckles before the morning 
breeze. And thus was this tgurnay so 
soon broken up, to the sad discomfiture of 
those who had come from distant parts, 
many a weary mile, to behold it. Many, 
who had been up with the dawn, and had 
endured hunger and uneasiness for hours — 
neither the King's castle, nor the villages 
round, having wherewithal to supply the 
wants of the vast multitudes here assembled — were now compelled to return home, 
with curiosity as little satisfied as their 
appetites, unable to tell the real conclusion 
of the festival. They did, however, carry 
with them a vague knowledge of a spectacle more marvellous than that they came 





to behold ; and widely did they spread it 
into distant towns and other shires ; some 
to the heaths of Lincoln some up the 
pleasant hills of Leicestershire, some to 
the forests of Nottingham, and some to 
the high regions of Derby. 





THE SEVENTH NIGHT. 

Here was miniatured a stately chamber, in part 
richly illuminated. Under a canopy, wujS a long 
sleeping-couch, but no person appeared there. In 
another part of this spacious room, where the light 
prevailed less, sat one, who leaned thoughtfully on 
a table, his hand covering his eyes ; another figure 
stood near, but so obscurely drawn, that for what 
designed could not be certainly known. Images, 
holding lamps, were pictured in the chamber. 




THE SEVENTH NIGHT. 



That same night, King Henry signed 
the death-warrant of the merchant ; and 
he gave notice, that, on the morrow, he 
would depart for his palace of Woodstock. 
And that same night, as was said, the prisoner thought he heard again his deathwarning ; the same song of peace passed 
by his turret, as at this hour of the evening before. Others there were, also, about 
the castle, who, that night, heard strange 
sounds, and witnessed more than they 
could well understand. 
 


 

Amongst these, were the wardours of 
a postern, near the north walls, who reported they heard grievings, and, more 
than once, saw some one pass, almost 
within reach of their spikes. When they 
spoke the watch-word, it answered not, 
and, when they raised their spears, it fled. 
The same appearance, though not the same 
moanings, was heard of those, who kept 
guard on the east ramparts ; and the groom 
wayte, it was said, as he sat within the 
porch of King Henry's lodgings, on a sudden, saw some one standing still before it. 
He had not heard a step, but, on raising 
his head, perceived that figure. It was suspected he had been slumbering, and had 
dreamed of the strange accident, which 
had befallen the day before. But, whether this appearance were a reality, or 
only an impression of his fear, certain it is, 
that, being on watch alone, for his master 



 

had never piped the first hour, since the 
night of his alarm, he had net courage now 
to speak, or even to step forward, till the 
object of his terror had passed away. Then, 
he came forth of the porch to little purpose ; for, all without was still and lonesome, and nothing to be distinguished, save 
the huge shadowy towers around the 
court, and the stars twinkling bright 
above them. 

But he also heard, at times, a strain of 
mournful music, and thought it was a requiem in the chapel. Remembering the 
late strange occurrence in this very court, 
as he had paced his round there, he began to think this Avas in very truth the 
Prior of Saint Mary, come again on some 
secret errand of mischief to the imprisoned 
merchant ; and straight he wended to 
the keepers door, in Caesar's tower, to give 
alarm. 



 

But no one heard him there, the keeper 
being, at that very time, in the King's hall, 
waiting his command. Then he went to 
call the ancient wayte, his master, who 
was sleeping out his sleep in his own 
lodge; and, by the time he came back 
with his groom, this unknown person was 
no where to be found. If these men, in 
the midst of the castle, were confounded 
with fearful thoughts, the poor prisoner 
above, distant, forlorn and distressed was 
no less so ; for, as he lay, in watchfulness and sorrow, ruminating on the 
extraordinary occurrence in the field of 
Tom-nament, suddenly he thought a voice, 
without his door, called upon his name. 
He would not turn at the sound, fearful 
of beholding behind his grate the dim 
visage of the Prior of Saint Mary, as he 
had seen it on a former night. He knew 
that mahgnity alone could lead him hither; 
and, dreading even the sound of his voice. 



 

he drew his cloak over his head, and covered himself close, hardly daring, at the 
moment, either to see, or hear. 

A loud knocking, and then a call roused 
him, and, at last, he heard his name spoken ; when, instantly turning at the sound, 
he perceived, behind the grate, not the 
dark countenance of the Prior, nor the 
stern one of his keeper, but that of his 
beloved and unhapj)y wife. Hardly daring to trust his senses, he held the lamp 
nearer, before he became convinced it was 
her very self. Without question, or one 
word of endearment, she called tremulously upon him to save himself by flight ; 
and, repeating his name with hurrying fear, 
entreated him to unfasten the door on his 
side, telling him that means were provided for his escape, but that he had not an 
instant to lose, ere the keeper might return. 

Then, almost swooning with apprehension, she undrew the outer bolts, and was 
so much exhausted by the effort, that she 
clung to the bars of the grate for support. 
Woodreeve did not now, as on a former 
night, hesitate to undraw the inner bolts : 
no ; with the eagerness of hope and joy, 
on this unlooked for meeting and intelligence, he forced back the bolts, and expected, such was the enchantment of his 
elation, that the door would open. He 
had forgotten, that the keeper's key, or 
the Prior s, w as necessary to unfasten it. 

With this recollection despair returned, 
for, all his strength was not sufficient to 
force the lock. When he had ceased his 
efforts, and had somewhat calmed the 
distress of his wife, he inquired by what 
means she had heard of his situation ; for 
the messenger he had despatched, he well 
knew, could not, in so short a time, have 
reached her. He asked, also, how she had 
gained admittance to his prison. To these 



 

questions, she answered, that she had received a former letter, mentioning the time 
of his landing at Hull, while, with her sister, living in Gloucestershire ; and had written by the carrier, to tell Iiim she would 
abide there, till he should pass thither on 
his way home. While there awaiting him, 
she had heard of what had passed at 
Kenilworth, from one who being at Warwick, when the King took wassel there, 
had returned almost in his train to witness the festivals at the castle. 

There, hearing the name of the prisoner, whose extraordinary accusation of the 
Baron de Blonde ville had become known 
over the whole forest and county, he had 
relinquished the expectation of fine sights, 
that he might hasten to acquaint her with 
her husband's danger ; and it was by his 
contrivance, that she had gained admittance, and had hoped to effect an escape ; 
that, for two nights, they had walked 
 



 

about the castle ; and, when all was still, 
she had sung aloud, in the hope, that he 
might hear her voice, and know that she 
was near him. He now doubted not, that 
he had heard this, when he thought he 
listened to a warning of his death. 

She was then proceeding to give him 
some particulars of the plan for his escape, 
when they heard footsteps ascending the 
stair. She made no attempt to conceal herself; for, since all hope for her husband 
was gone, she had nothing more to dread, 
and she awaited the expected appearance 
of the keeper, with indifference. 

The keeper — for it was he- came on, 
with lamp in one hand, and a parchment 
in the other ; and, seeing a stranger at 
the chamber-door, he surlily demanded 
who she was, and what she wanted. Her 
answers told part of the truth ; on which 
he seemed somewhat softened, not refusing 
her admittance to the prison-chamber of 



 

her husband. Then, the poor prisoner 
saw enter it, at the same time, his beloved 
wife, and the keeper bearing his deathwarrant ! Happily for her, she saw not 
this ; she saw only her husband, and ran 
into his arms, and wept upon his breast. 
What he then suffered, who saw not only 
the evil prepared for himself, but for her, 
none may tell. 

When Woodreeve could recollect himself, he made sign to the keeper, to conceal that dreadful instrument from his 
wife, and to withdraw awhile, that he 
might prepare her for what was to come. 
This man so far respected the misery he 
witnessed, as to yield, and leave the chamber. Then, Woodreeve, calling forth all 
his fortitude to bear him with composure 
through the relation of his adventures 
since he had landed on English shore, led 
her, step by step, to the knowledge of all 
that had passed. But, when he came to 



 

relate the manner of his trial, and all that 
had happened during it, all his endeavours 
to prepare her for the sad result were of 
no avail to his distressed wife ; who, before he could come to his sentence, was 
gone beyond hearing, having swooned, as 
if dead, by his side. 

The keeper, who was brought up to 
the chamber by the cries of Woodreeve 
for help, was moved at what he beheld, 
and aid was administered, which slowly 
brought her back to consciousness. Soon 
as it did, they conveyed her out of that 
chamber, while the keeper showed to the 
prisoner his death warrant, which gave 
order for his execution early on the morrow. It were vain and cruel to dwell 
upon the misery of this innocent man, 
thus brought into jeopardy by the repeated 
crimes of others. How to break the unhappy message to his poor wife he knew 
not : yet know it she soon must ; and he 



 

thought it were better she should know 
his sentence from his own mouth than 
from any other. So lately met, after long 
absence, and now to part for ever ! He 
desired the keeper to bring her to the 
chamber, soon as he thought she had recovered strength enough to hear, without 
destructive suffering, the truth he must 
unfold. And here a dark veil of misery 
falls upon a scene of pangs, too acute, too 
searching, to be made known. 

And to many others in the castle was 
this night dreadful ! To the young Lady 
Baroness, and to the King himself! How 
changed, indeed, was the whole appearance of this castle, from that it wore on 
y ester-eve ; where, if the inhabitants were 
wakeful, it was only from the restlessness 
of joy, and preparation for the grand festival of the morrow ! Where were now the 
mirth and music, with which these walls 
had rung ? where the feast, the dance. 



 

that had made every minute pass so quickly to the poor mortals, whose hours were 
fleeting away beneath these princely roofs ? 
All was changed to grief and silence. The 
footsteps only of attendants were heard 
along the halls and galleries ; no voice 
spoke there ; it seemed, indeed, as if every 
one were fearful of speaking. When, perchance, the door of a chamber was opened, 
no burst of merriment or song came 
forth, no harp sounded, no hum of voices. 
The impression of this whole change may 
be best signified by conceiving what one 
might feel on another change, on a smaller 
scale ; that in one hall, for instance, of this 
same edifice, which should have been lately deserted of its splendid guests, where 
the few lights still burning might serve but 
to show its lonely grandeur, while one 
heavy step proceeds about the tables to 
extinguish these ; and then the long sound 
of the closed door denotes the vastness and 
the emptiness of all that space. 



 

Now of the King's condition and the 
things, that befell, on this night, there go 
divers tales. The truth were difficult to 
hit, because of the closeness, that guards a 
King from eye and ear, within his private 
chambers. Yet there be occasions, when 
the strangeness of occurrences, that seem 
not of this world's ordering, surprize and 
thus overcome the fidelity of servants, nay 
even the prudence of others, most concerned in them, and they speak of many 
things, which, at less pressing times, they 
would keep safe locked, within their secret 
thouo;ht, to feed alone their own fear and 
wonder. Thus might it be, on this night. 
There went forth many strange tales. 
This, which folio weth, was much received 
at the time. Nay there were strong witnesses of some parts of it in the attending 
pages, and even in words dropped by the 
King himself, to warrant the passing of 
the story. But, be this as it may, I tell 
but what was told, in the Court itself. 



 

It was said then, that King Henry, after 
signing the death warrant of Woodreeve, 
dismissed every one from his presence, 
and retired to his chamber for all night. 
There, he would hardly endure the necessary presence of his pages, while he underwent the usual ceremonies of his wardrobe. 
No sooner had they divested him of his 
mantle and surcoat, and helped him with 
his night-robe, than he would permit no 
further intrusion upon his melancholy and 
vexing thoughts. Full of sadness was he 
and of self-reproach, it may be believed, 
for the premature death of one he had 
loved and esteemed, and for whose fall he 
blamed himself, since, had he not so long 
delayed to execute, what he called justice 
on the merchant, whom he was still willing to think a false accuser, the Baron, he 
held, would be still alive. 

He sat thus ruminating, while all was 
still around him ; and what he heard afar 



was not likely to change the temper of his 
mind — sad and solemn music it was, mingled as he thought, with lamentation. He 
listened, and distinguished a choral chant 
of voices, faintly rise and fall. It was the 
dirge, which was performed in the chapel 
for the departed Baron de Blondeville, in 
that very chapel, where, so few days before, his nuptials had been solemnized, in 
the King's presence, and where strains of 
joy, and hope and benediction had lately 
ascended. 

Now, ever and anon, the trumpet groaned, and, in dismal and interrupted strain 
was sung, "Darkness is my bed— the 
worm is my sister. I am covered with 
the mist of death, nor may the sight of 
man behold me.'' 

The King went to an oriel-window, 
that looked towards the chapel, and heard 
the chant of the choristers swell with 
these words, " Eternal rest give unto 



 

him !" And then the faint response concluded with, " Rest in peace !" Then, the 
instruments sunk low into a murmur, and 
the voices were no more heard. 

Now, the tale goes, that, when his Highness distinguished these words of the requiem, he was overcome with the sad 
thoughts they brought forth, and he sat 
down in his chair, and even wept, leaning 
his arm upon a table, without noticing 
what lay there. When the King took his 
hand from his eyes, he beheld a sword — 
the very sword worn by the Baron de 
Blondeville, and which Woodreeve had 
claimed, as the weapon of his murdered 
kinsman ; the same, of which a resemblance had this day been raised up before 
the King, by the stranger knight, in the 
field of tournament, who had there pointed 
it, with deadly power, against the Baron. 

On seeing this, his Highness was greatly amazed, marvelling how, and with 



 

what intent it had been conveyed. While 
yet he gazed, the blade became dull and 
cloudy, and large spots of rust began to 
appear, which turned to a bloody hue. 
Then his Highness, terrified by what he 
saw, and thinking it the work of sorcery, 
looked towards the ante-room, where lay 
the esquires of the body, with intent to 
call them, and perceived some one, as he 
thought, passing along his chamber. The 
silver images, which had held lights, stood 
not there, and a gloom, nigh to darkness, 
spread through this spacious chamber, save 
just where some one seemed to watch. To 
that side the Kmg directed his voice, and 
then rose up to learn the truth. Now, the 
hangings of tliis chamber were storied vAth 
the famous siege of Aeon, where the first 
King Richard performed such valourous 
deeds, and the Hght so fell on that King 
on horseback, that to the King Henry he 
seemed to be verily riding out of the arras. 




and the sword he held to be gleaming to 
and fro. 

This was but a passing phantasie of the 
King's own mind, as was afterwards declared : but that, which followed, was said 
to be no deceit of his fancy. 

He had risen to discover whether any 
person was in his chamber, where there 
had been that appearance of some one 
passing ; he saw a gleam of light, like unto 
the glistening of Richard's sword, yet neither substance, nor shape, there. Again 
and nearer, that light appeared, and did 
not vanish immediately as before ; and, 
before it faded, it assumed a form and 
countenance ; and the King again perceived before him the stranger-knight. 
Having now lost all power to summon to 
him those who watched without, his 
Highness only heard these words, " The 
worm is my sister !" 

The King gasping in breathless terror, 



 

said, " What art thou ? Wherefore art 
thou come?" 

The voice answered, " Give me rest — 
the worm is my sister. The mist of death 
is on me !'' 

The King again said, " Wherefore dost 
thou come?'' to which the phantom answered, " Give me rest!" 

" How may that be ? " 

" Release an innocent man." 

" How may I know him to be such ? " 
said the King. 

" By the sword of justice, that Hes before thee. A knight -hospitaller was slain 
by that sword ; it has, this day, slain his 
slayer, Gaston de Blondeville. The Prior 
of St. Mary's was his accomplice. Punish 
the guilty. Release the innocent. Give 
me rest ! " 

The King, as was said, had now sufficiently recovered from his surprize, to demand proof of the Prior's guilt, on which 





the vision answered, " I will call up one, 
who may no more deceive." 

It is said, that the King's courage here 
failed, and he called out, " Forbear !" 

" Recall your warrant, then," demanded 
the spectre solemnly, " ere it be too late 
to save an innocent man." 

At that moment the matin bell sounded. 
" My time is short," said the vision ; " if 
he perish for my sake, he shall not fall 
alone. Be warned !" 

While these vords still vibrated on his 
ear, the King again heard the chant from 
the chapel, and knew that they were performing the second requiem. 

" I am summoned," said the vision ; 
" My bed is in darkness ; the worm is my 
sister. Yet my hope " 

The King, on looking up, saw only the 
dim countenance of the knight ; his form 
had disappeared ; in the next moment, the 
face too had passed away. But who may 



 

speak the horror of the King, when, in its 
place he beheld that of the Baron, but as 
in death ; an expression of solemnity and 
suffering overspread his visage ; and the 
King heard the words, " My guilt was my 
doom ; I shall behold you no more. The 
prisoner is innocent. The Prior of St. Mary's is gone to his account. Be warned !" 

At these words cold drops stood on the 
King's forehead, and his eyes remained, 
fixed on the vacant air, where the countenance of the Baron had just appeared. At 
the same instant, these words of the distant requiem rose on his ear, " I go unto 
the dark lane ; that is covered with the 
mist of death, —a land of misery and darkness, where is the shadow of death and 
no order. The eye of man may no more 
behold me." 

Then the King lost all recollection ; his 
ear was closed against every sound. How 
long he remained thus none knew ; only 



 

it was yet early morning, when the esquires, sleeping in the ante-room, were 
roused by his summons. Then, his Highness despatched one to the constable of the 
castle, with command to attend him in his 
chamber, another to St. Mary's, to know 
how it fared with the Prior, and yet another to bring the Earl of Cornwall to 
him. For my Lord Archbishop, the King 
as he believed of himself, wished not to 
disturb the repose due to his age ; but in 
truth he liked not to see him ; for he had 
spoken truths, which his Highness now 
too heavily feared it had been his duty to 
listen to. 

The messenger, despatched to the Priory, 
had no sooner passed the castle-ditch, and 
gotten on the outside of the great portal, 
than he espied carts, drawn up under the 
walls, in waiting, to carry away the poor 
merchant, ere those in the castle could 
behold the sad sight of his removal for the 



 

dreadful purpose, that had been determined upon. He spied, too, under the 
gloomy dawn, the whole of that dismal 
assemblage silently watching to take 
away their prey. The page rued the jury's 
sentence on the prisoner, and he went on 
his way, with heavy heart ; for the merchant was pitied of many. 

When he reached the Priory, the brethren were at matins ; and he was told the 
Prior was in his chamber. Marvelling, as 
they did, at the King's early message, one 
delayed, as little as might be, before he 
went to acquaint the Prior with it. He 
struck upon his chamber-door; and, receiving no answer, he went within, and 
the Prior was found, as had been foresaid ; 
he was lifeless in his bed, stretched grim 
in death. 

He, who beheld him thus, descended 
the stair, with all speed, to acquaint the 
brethren then assembled, with what had 
 



 

happened, and found them in consternation great as his own, though from a different cause. 

The tapers were dying away, and the 
only light, that glimmered strongly on the 
walls, came from a spot, where stood the 
armed figure of a knight hospitaller. His 
shield threw a deeper gloom around it 
on the tombs and even on the tapers of 
the monks. He pointed with his sword 
to the ground he stood on, and exclaimed 
mournfully, " A murdered knight hospitaller lies below ; search for his bones, and 
save an innocent man from death !" 

The figure stood for a moment ; and, 
as it raised its shield, the flame thereon 
flashed, within the hollow helmet, and 
showed the stern, yet mournful countenance of the knight, such as it had appeared before the King. 

Then sunk the figure with the flame, 
into the earth. 



 

For a while, the brethren stood in utter 
silence and amazement ; then they began 
to look upon one another, and to ask what 
this meant ; and, even while they did so, 
a thrilling voice groaned from beneath. 
Then, without further hesitation, they sent 
for him whose office it was to dig graves, 
that search might straight be made, where 
that sound had seemed to be heard. Such 
of the monks as, in this tumult of fear 
and wonder, had time to understand, that 
their Prior was said to be dead, now hastened to his chamber to learn the truth — 
others remained in the church. 

Some of these dared to approach the 
spot, where the spectre had appeared ; and 
found it to be over that nameless grave, 
near to which the poor merchant had found 
refuge ; and where their deceased brother, 
Anselm, had borne witness to a supernatural appearance. When the lay-brother, 
the digger of the graves, came, who had 
 



 

not long been in office, he pored over the 
stone, marvelling that one so little ancient should have neither name, nor date, 
nor inscription of any kind, on his tomb. 
There were some standing by and observing, who, if they had been so minded, 
could have told, that it had not been 
always thus : but they held their peace. 

On raising that stone and turning up 
the earth beneath, a coffin appeared, bearing this inscription : — 

" Reginald de Folville, Knight Hospitaller of St. John, slain in a wood of Ardenn, rests here ! " 

There was neither taper, nor visible 
flame of any kind, over the grave, yet 
was this distinctly shown, by a strong 
light. The coffin-lid, which was of stone, 
like the receptacle, and was cut in shape 
of the head and helmet, being removed, 
there lay exposed to view the figure of the 
dead knight, in the armour in which he 



 

was slain, and such as had but now appeared on the grave ; the shield was on 
his breast ; but no sword was at his side. 
At this spectacle, some of the brethren 
shrunk, overcome with so sad a sight ; 
others pressed forward, and bent over the 
grave with intense curiosity. 

The features of the knight were entire, 
though shrunk and changed in death. 
They were of a noble cast, and bore the 
very countenance of the apparition. On 
the forehead appeared the death-wound. 
While yet they looked, the appearance of 
the knight began to change, and the countenance to shrink and fade away. Some 
said this was only an effect of the living 
air upon mortal features so long shut up 
in death ; others said not so, but that it 
was, like all the rest, to bring truth to 
light and administer justice to an innocent 
man. Then the coffin lid was replaced, 
and that awful spectacle of mortality was 



 

hidden from view, for all time. During 
this, still music was heard in the air, like 
unto a requiem, hymning some blessed 
spirit. 

The brethren, while they listened, were 
hushed in holy peace ; some knelt over the 
grave ; others stood, with hands and eyes 
lifted up, as if following the sound with 
their attention ; and others, drawing the 
cowl over their eyes, bent their heads and 
wept in silence. Without the church, the 
old oaks, swaying in the wind, mingled in 
high and solemn harmony with the lessening chorus, till their murmur alone remained. Those, who had heard that soothing 
strain, long stood, as listening, still rapt in 
the quietude it had breathed forth, till, 
at length, their peace was enlivened into 
cheering hope. 

The grave-digger, who had withdrawn 
to some distance, was the first to recover 
himself, and the sound of his footsteps 



 

drew back to present life the thoughts of 
the holy men around him. 

Then, they recollected the death of their 
Prior, and that the King's messenger 
was yet waiting for the tidings, which his 
Highness, by his extraordinary anxiety, 
appeared to have foreknown. One of 
them returned to the castle with the esquire, who, when he came near the gates, 
looking anxiously to see, whether the poor 
merchant was yet gone to his doom, 
perceived, that the carts, with the whole 
mournful apparatus of death, were already 
departed. On perceiving this, he struck 
his hands together, in sorrow and despair, with a force of action, which drew the 
observation of his companion, who soon 
learned the occasion of his honest emotion, 
and suffered with him. 

How much more would each have suffered, could he have witnessed all, that 
had passed within the prison-chamber, 



 

while those marvels were passing in court, 
and Priory, as ah-eady told ! How much 
more could they have seen all the struggles of Woodreeve, for composure and resignation, and, yet harder task ! his endeavours to prepare and reconcile his wife 
to calmer sorrow. Of late, she fiad refused to allow it possible, that her husband 
could thus unjustly and ignominiously 
perish in the cause of humanity ; and she 
would have forced her way to the King's 
presence, there to have pleaded the truth, 
notliing doubting she could have convinced 
him of his mistake, had not bars and bolts 
withheld her. For the arguments of her 
husband, on this subject, they were as 
nothing with her, in this state of desperation. And thus passed the heavy hours of 
this night to those poor sufferers, till the 
keeper came to bid Woodreeve prepare for 
death, the guard being then in waiting to 
carry him away. Then, the poor prisoner 



 

perceived, what until this moment, he had 
been unconscious of, that hope, in spite of 
reason, had lingered at his heart ; for, now 
only was it, that he felt the full pang of 
despair. 

And, when he heard the summons afar 
off, that deep and dismal bell, he stood 
trembling with horror, unconscious where 
he was — unconscious even that his wife 
lay senseless on his pallet ! Again it called, that hollow murmuring death-sound ! 
He heard not the footsteps ascending the 
stair, nor the bars of his prison withdrawn ; 
that shuddering sound alone crept on his 
ear. 

He perceived, however, the keeper 
standing now not in the room, but near 
the door ; and he began to recover his recollection, like one, who has been stunned 
by a blow ; yet was there a gloomy and 
dreadful stillness at his heart and over all 
arovmd him. He turned to his wife, and 
 



 

leaned over her, without shedding a tear, 
or uttering a groan. She was pallid, as a 
corpse ; his own cheek was of the same 
hue ; yet he called not for help. 

The keeper advanced into the room ; 
others, as if from respect for misery, 
Avaited without, at the door. Perceiving 
the condition of the poor woman, he sent 
off some one for assistance ; and, taking 
Woodreeve by the arm, he looked upon 
him, as if he wished, yet feared, to speak. 
But the prisoner saw not this ; for, he 
raised not up his eyes. Then, the keeper 
shook him by the arm and spoke ; but he 
heard not the words ; he only answered, 
that he was ready ; and then, turning to 
give one long, last look to his poor wife, 
he found his eyes could not well distinguish her. 

He groaned heavily, and was departing; 
but still the keeper told him, and, in a 



 

voice less rugged than usual said, " Read 
this paper." 

" I cannot see the letters," answered the 
prisoner ; " my sight is gone ; and it is also 
useless to read my death-warrant." 

" Can you endure to hear it read ?" said 
the keeper. 

"Why not?'' replied the merchant; 
" What have I to fear, in this world ?" 

" Have you nothing to hope ?" 

On this the prisoner lifted up his countenance ; his sight began to return, and 
he looked at the keeper ; his soul was 
trembling in his eyes. 

Then the keeper ventured to call out 
" Respite !" — and instantly the whole aspect of Woodreeve was lighted up, like one 
called back from death. 

But this spirit was short lived ; in the 
next instant he called out, " My wife ! my 
wife !" and bent over her in an agony of 



 

woe. "Is no help to be had?" cried he 
" She is gone ! your respite comes too 
late." But, while he so spoke, one, who 
had been sent for a restorative, returned, 
and, after long application, she revived. 

Then Woodreeve, when his first joy 
had subsided, began to consider this was a 
respite, not a release, and that his sufferings, perhaps, were not ended, but postponed. This respite, which now began to 
be viewed by him with doubt, had well nigh 
destroyed his wife with sudden joy ; to 
her mind it brought, not merely hope, but 
certainty of life for her husband. A convulsion followed, and she was, for a short, 
time, in as much danger as before. Hardly had she recovered from this, when an 
order came from the constable to give 
Woodreeve his liberty and a chamber in 
the castle better suited for him. Assured 
of this, he drew his cloak over his eyes, 
and stood, for some time, weeping in silence, save that his sobs were audible; 
then he raised his hands and eyes to Heaven, and bowed his head. His wife remained weeping on his garment, till he took 
her to his heart, and then they left that 
prison-chamber, hand in hand together. 

When the King had heard of the Prior's 
death, he was struck with marvellous 
dread, and with conviction of his falseIiood and of the merchant's innocence. He 
bitterly repented of the favourable opinion 
he had so long adhered to, respecting the 
Baron de Blondeville, and of the weak 
credulity, with which he had listened to 
the artful suggestions of that false Prior, 
rather than to the arguments and to 
the strong conviction of the Archbishop of 
York. But the former went with his 
passions, the latter against them ; and he 
helped to deceive himself Yet, when he 
did find out his error, he was warm and 
generous in counteracting it ; and, now 



 

that he was assured how unjustly the 
poor merchant had been made to suffer, 
he loaded him with present kindness, and 
prepared to repay him hereafter by certain grants and privileges, that made 
Woodreeve the most wealthy merchant 
of his guild. 

Nor did his Highness forget the forlorn 
widow and children of the deceased knight, 
whom he fostered and nobly supported. 
The miniature of that knight and the golden chain he had worn he returned to his 
family ; and the Jew, who had forsworn 
himself, at the instigation of the Baron, 
was punished with heavy fine and imprisonment, the fine being amongst the 
King's gifts to Woodreeve. But, though 
his Highness found it now his chief delight to do kindness to the merchant and 
to the family of his unfortunate kinsman, 
yet could he not endure to behold him, 



 

nathless the expectations of most in the 
court. 

And now that the Prior was dead, 
many things came out, concerning him, 
which had not been suspected. He was 
of birth so low, that no one could learn 
whence he had sprung ; but it appeared, 
that, not many years before, he had been 
in arms, and in the class of a follower of 
Sir Gaston de Blondeville, one of the retainers, whom the latter was obHged to 
produce, on receiving his gilt spurs. 

He was conjectured to have come with 
him from Gascony ; for, he spoke that 
tongue, and had all the craft and soaring 
vanity of that people ; but he was not born 
there ; he had no foreign sound in his discourse. How he came by his wealth in 
those lawless times, and the use he made 
of it to procure him power, may be easily 
guessed. And it appeared this was well 



 

suspected by my Lord of York, who had 
never looked upon him with a favourable 
eye, and had constantly endeavoured to 
counteract his pernicious influence. 

When, hereafter, his messenger returned 
from Exeter, it appeared, that none in that 
neighbourhood had ever known the Prior 
of Saint Mary's, such as he had described 
himself to be. The arts too, practised by 
this Prior with certain of the brethren, 
who remembered the interment of Reginald 
de Folville~-and with certain people of Kenilworth, who recollected his story, were 
now all exposed. Those, who, from education and station, might not have been 
suspected of such baseness, were now 
brought to truth, and were fain to hide 
their heads for shame. The Prior's memory was thus condemned to detestation. 
Be it remembered, he was no true son of 
the church. 



THE EIGHTH DAY. 



THE EIGHTH DAY. 

Here was a drawing, divided into two compartments. In one, was presented an Archbishop, 
kissing the hand of a crowned King; in another, 
was the sole portraiture of a Prince ; who, from his 
mantle, and the feathers embroidered on it, appeared 
to be a Prince of Wales. 



THE EIGHTH DAY. 



On this day, the merchant and his wife 
departed from Kenilworth, where they had 
suffered such extremes of good and evil. 
They departed, carrying with them joy 
and blessings. But it was not till they 
had gone a good distance through the 
forest, that they felt themselves fully at 
liberty. Then, as they looked back, and 
saw afar off the grey towers of the castle, 
above the tawny woods, nay, that very 
prison-turret, perched over all, which 
Woodreeve had never expected to leave, 
but for death, their hearts overflowed with 
thankfulness, and tears of joy fell fast. 










Yet, turned they suddenly from view of it, 
and then went forward, even faster than 
before. After leaving these woods of 
Ardenn, they journeyed homewards in 
peace. 

And many others departed from the 
King's court homeward, on this day ; especially, my Lord Archbishop took solemn 
leave of his Highness, who gave him all 
due honours, for his wise counsel, regretting also, that he had not sooner followed 
it. The Archbishop, pleased with the release of Woodreeve and with the bounties 
since bestowed upon him, bowed himself, 
mth willing homage, to his lord the King, 
and bade farewell to the young Prince 
Edward, with affectionate respect and 
with lofty hopes of what he might hereafter prove himself. 

And, this day, left Kenilworth, the unhappy lady, Baroness de Blondeville, conveyed away by her noble parents to their 



 

own castle, there to pass in quiet shade 
this season of affliction. And those, who 
have mourned with her in this chronicle 
of her sad story, may haply hke to look 
into the glass of her futurity. There, may 
they see many dark years of grief and 
sadness, passed within her father's towers ; 
but onward they will see the gleam of 
hope and joy striking athwart her path, 
and further still, the calm sunshine of 
happiness settling on her home, where 
she is married to a nobleman right worthy 
of her. And here we veil this mirror of 
futurity, and come back to the passing 
time. 

And, on this very day, the King his-self, 
who now loathed Kenilworth, broke up 
the court, and departed in all state with 
the Queen, for his palace, at Woodstock. 
The eventful days and hours of a very 
short period had wrought great change in 
the King's mind, and in the views and 



 

hopes of many in his train. Some had 
profited in wisdom by what they had experienced, or witnessed ; others had suf' fered truth to ghde before their eyes, without attention enough to derive one lesson 
from it. 

And now, the King and all his court 
passing away under the battlements of this 
stately castle, in the pomp and order, with 
which, eight days before, they had approached it, his trumpets sounded their 
last to these towers, which echoed back 
the farewell ; and then they were left to 
solitude and silence. This was the last 
gleam of courtly splendour, that lighted 
up the walls of Kenilworth, in this King's 
reign. And now the fading woods strewed yellow leaves on the long cavalcade, 
that wound below, whispering a moral to 
departing greatness ; and their high tops, 
rustling in the blast, seemed to sigh over 



 

those, who were leaving them for ever to 
their own quietness. 

The King's banner still waved on the 
Keep, till his Highness had reached the 
end of the furthest avenue, the last spot, 
from which he could look back on the 
castle, standing, with all its solid masses of 
tower and bastion, amidst the rich and 
varied hues of autumn. While he gazed, 
a cloud overcast it, and then a gliding 
light showed every battlement and turret, 
wall and bastion, window and loop distinctly in succession, nay, the very grate 
and spikes of the port-cuUis, hanging in 
the arch of the great portal, under which 
his train had passed. 

Just as his Highness turned into the 
close woods, his banner on the Keep bowed 
homage, and then was lowered to be no 
more raised till long in after years, when 
the King's camp lay in Ardenn, and Prince 



 

Edward planted the royal ensign over the 
sons of the rebel Montfort, and restored 
Kenilworth to his sovereign lord and 
father. 

This vision of the living world, which 
had so suddenly appeared in these wild solitudes, which had, in so short period, carried the joy and mourning of human passions, beneath these shades of Ardenn ; 
which had banqueted and striven, had 
hoped and feared, had plotted and punished, had fretted and triumphed, had shown 
the extremes of princely grandeur, and of 
domestic misery, of deep villany and generous humanity, of supernatural power 
and mortal weakness, of human craft and 
of controlling, over-powering justice — this 
vision was now all vanished as in air, to 
be no more seen, or traced here, peace and 
silence closing over the towers where it 
had been. 

The halls, where late the banquet reveiled, or the sceptre of justice threatened, now echoed only to the straying steps 
of ancient menials. In the courts so lately 
filled with princely pomp and tumult, 
where the hurrying foot passed incessantly 
to and fro ; where the many sounding 
hoof trampled, and the hum of voices rose, 
all was now so still, that, when the solitary sentinel ceased his measured pace, 
you might hear only the shivering of the 
ivy, or the distant echo to the closing door 
of some deserted chamber, murmuring 
through empty galleries, which, of late, to 
have looked upon would have filled you 
with marvel of the high dames and gaudy 
gen tils passing through them. These 
courts now spoke only at certain hours, 
when the watch-word went its round, or a 
single trumpet of the garrison called together the few armed tenants, stationed 
at gate, or rampart, and the guard was 
changed. 

 



 

Thus quickly passed away this courtly 
vision from these woods of Ardenn. And 
so from before every eye departs the vision 
of this life, whether it appear in lonesome 
forest, in busy city, in camp, or court, — 
where may be pressed within the compass 
of a few short days, the agitating passions, 
with all their varying shades and combinations, the numerous events and wise experience, that make up years of ordinary life 
and the seeming ages of a cloistered one ; 
for there, pale moment, lingering after moment, like rain-drop following drop, keeps 
melancholy chime with chants too formally repeated to leave, except on very 
few, the due impression of their meaning, 
and with slow returning vigils. Yet even 
here life is still a fleeting vision ! As 
such it fades, whether in court or convent, 
nor leaves a gleam behind — save of the 
light of good works ! 

nb tf)uj( tvCOtti) ti}ii Cv^to Cl^roniqut. 



CONCLUSION. 



WiLLOUGHTON, long before he had finished this " Trew Chronique," had some 
doubts, as to its origin. With the enthusiasm of an antiquary, he was willing to 
suppose it a real manuscript of the monks, 
in spite of some contradictory circumstances. The illuminations it exhibited, 
with the many abbreviations and quaintnesses in the writing, only a few of which, 
however, he has preserved in this, his 
translation, and those few but here and 
there, where they seem to have gained admission, by their accordance with the matter then in narration, these traits justified, 
in some degree, his willing opinion. 

Perhaps, one better versed in antiquities 
Would have found out, that several of the 
ceremonies of the court here exhibited, 
were more certainly those of the fourth 
Edward, than of the third Henry, or the 
second Richard, and would have assigned 
the manuscript to a later period than that 
of the title, or than that afterwards alluded to in the book, whether written by 
monk or layman. And though that same 
title said this chronicle was translated from 
the Norman tongue, by Grymbald, a monk 
of Saint Mary's Priory, it said nothing of 
its having been composed by one ; and the 
manuscript itself seemed to bear evidence 
against such a supposition, by the way in 
which some of the reigning superstitions 
of Henry the Third's time and of the 
monastic life in general were spoken of. 
He must have been a very bold man, at 



 

that period, who had dared to utter even 
from under a cowl, a doubt, concerning 
the practice of magic, or witchcraft. It 
is, however, to be acknowledged, that, on 
some other points, his notions were not 
unworthy of a monk of the thirteenth 
century, that is, if he really credited all 
the supposed incidents of the hall, and of 
several other parts of the castle. The 
way, in which he speaks of the melancholy monotony and other privations of a 
cloister, seem to come from heart-felt experience ; yet, if it had been so, he might 
not have ventured thus to have expressed 
his feelings. 

But at whatsoever period this " Trew 
Chronique" had been written, or by whomsoever, Willoughton was so willing to 
think he had met with a specimen of elder 
times, that he refused to dwell on the evidence, which went against its stated origin, or to doubt the old man's story of the 



 

way in which it had been found ; and he 
was about to enter upon another of these 
marvellous histories, entitled "A trew 
historie of two Mynstrells, that came by 
night to the commandary of Saint John 
Hospitaller, at Dalby sur les Wouldes, 
and what they there discovered." 

But, behold ! the beams of another day 
springing on the darkness ! On drawing 
aside a window-curtain, he perceived the 
dawn upon the horizon ; and, who ever yet 
behead those first pure tints of light upon 
the darkness, more touching, more eloquent to the soul, than even the glorious 
sun -rise, and turned abruptly from them ? 
The towers of Warwick castle soon began to show themselves on the east, their 
mighty shadows raised up against the increasing light in peace and stillness. The 
moraing-star alone rode bright above them, 
trembling on the edge of a soft purple 
cloud, that streaked the dawn. 



 

The heart of Willoughton was deeplyaffected by the almost holy serenity, the 
silent course of order and benevolence, 
that he witnessed in these first minutes of 
another day ; he looked up to Heaven, 
and breathed a prayer of blissful gratitude 
and adoration ; and then departed to his 
rest. 

" To-morrow to fresh fields and pastures new." 


